 just that, given the above considerations, there are reasons to question whether the representational state which plays that role will be a judgement. I now present a different account of meta-emotions evaluative 23 For further discussion, see Helm 2001: 190-213; Brady 2007: 273-84; Döring 2014: 124-26. Understanding Meta-Emotions 12 aspect, which is a phenomenologically more appealing alternative and further clarifies their distinctiveness. 3. A Perceptualist Account of Meta-Emotions 3.1 Outlining the model In what follows I provide a perceptualist account of meta-emotions which builds on the analysis given so far. The perceptual model is, however, only one option, although for reasons highlighted feeling and judgement theories encounter problems, and so unless those problems can be overcome such theories should be avoided.24 To start, it is helpful to say something about recent perceptual theories, according to which emotions are perceptual experiences of value. One commentator provides the following summary: 'According to this view emotional experiences in favourable circumstances disclose value properties to the subjects of those experiences, properties that are, in the basic cases, typically instantiated in the subjects' environment...in fear I may have a perceptual experience of an object's or event's fearsomeness, in aesthetic admiration I can become acquainted with an object's determinate beauty...'25 Given the idea that emotional experience discloses evaluative properties, as qualifying the objects of those experiences, a central claim of the perceptual model is that the intentional content of emotions is evaluative.26 Yet, how does aesthetic admiration, for example, make its subject aware of (apparent) evaluative properties, such as an object's determinate beauty? On one prominent version of the perceptual model, typical emotional experiences do so through their valenced phenomenology, more specifically through an intentional feeling of favouring or disfavouring, which serves as an uptake of (as presenting) the relevant evaluative properties of the emotions' object. In this sense, emotional intentionality is affective intentionality. This felt favour or disfavour is described as a felt attitude towards the object, which discloses the relevant value. So, an emotion of aesthetic admiration about a painting includes a felt valenced attitude (felt favour) towards it, which is experienced as picking up 24 Another option would be Julien Deonna and Fabrice Teroni's (2012: 76-89) view of emotions as felt bodily attitudes of action readiness. 25 Poellner 2016: 1. There are perceptualist views which don't think of emotions as involving disclosures of value. For example, neo-Jamesian perceptualist accounts, where the perception is of bodily states (see Prinz 2004; Barlassina and Newen 2014: 637-78). My interest is in accounts according to which emotions are perceptual experiences of value. 26 See Poellner 2016: 8-11. See also Döring 2007: 363-94; Johnston 2001: 181-214 (cf. Deonna and Teroni 2012: 70; Dokic and Lemaire 2015: 235). 13 on – as registering and so presenting – the determinate beauty of the painting. On this characterization, the valenced intentional attitude is experienced, according to Peter Poellner, as 'intelligibly motivated by [evaluative] features of the object itself'.27 More could be said about this version of the perceptual model, yet it suffices for my purposes. Can it be productively applied to meta-emotions? Note, many of the features highlighted in sections 1 and 2 are congenial to it, such as meta-emotional experiences being intentional, having a felt phenomenology, and being motivated by their intentional object(s). The first distinctive claim of the perceptualist model applied to meta-emotions is that metaemotions are felt disclosures – affective perceptual experiences – of the relevant evaluative properties of their target emotions, where those evaluative properties are the relevant thick evaluative properties, such as the disgusting, embarrassing, amusing, offensive, fearsome, etc. The idea that meta-emotions involve evaluative appraisals of their target emotion is common in the psychological literature, and the perceptualist model provides a distinctive take on this.28 Meta-emotions are claimed to be experienced as an uptake of – as presenting and so disclosing – evaluative properties of their target emotions. Consider the following explanation: I respond with embarrassment to your anger at X, and in doing so my embarrassment discloses the target emotion as embarrassing (or, put otherwise, presents it under the aspect of the embarrassing). And whereas in the non-meta case the 'formal' object (i.e. the presented value property) can qualify any 'particular' object (i.e. a physical particular, person, event, or state of affairs), in the meta-emotion case the 'formal' object, the presented value property necessarily qualifies one specific type of 'particular' object, namely emotions themselves. Yet, as in the non-meta case, we can ask how does a meta-emotional experience make its subject aware of the relevant evaluative properties (e.g. the embarrassing character of your anger; the repulsive character of my lust)? By applying the version of the perceptual model under consideration, we get the following: meta-emotions present evaluative properties of their target emotions through their affective intentionality – through a felt intentional attitude of favour or disfavour towards the target emotion – which registers, and so presents, those evaluative properties. Turning to a specific case, we get the following explanation. I respond with embarrassment to your anger at X, and in so doing my embarrassment registers that the target emotion (anger at X) is embarrassing, through a felt valenced intentional attitude of 27 Poellner 2016: 6. This claim only applies to emotions which are experienced as intelligibly motivated by evaluative features of their objects – so not recalcitrant emotions or reflex 'truncated' emotional responses. 28 See Bartsch et al. 2010: 167-190; Jäger and Bänninger-Huber 2015: 795-805; Koven 2011: 125561; Mitmansgruber et al. 2009: 448-53). Understanding Meta-Emotions 14 disfavour towards it. Taking another example, think of contempt for another's sadness about X. In affectively responding with contempt to your sadness, my contempt discloses your sadness as contemptible, through a felt valenced intentional attitude of disfavour towards it which registers, and so presents, the evaluative property of the contemptible. Importantly, as noted in section 1, we need a way of distinguishing between metaemotional experiences and other occurrent intentional states which take emotions as their targets. Now that we have the perceptual model on the table we can meet this constraint. Consider that I might believe that my partner's anger is embarrassing, or even see that my partner's anger is embarrassing, yet without experiencing any emotional response. On the perceptual model, at least part of the difference in the meta-emotional case – when I respond with embarrassment to my partner's anger – is that my meta-emotion presents that anger as embarrassing through its affective intentionality, that is through a felt intentional attitude of disfavour towards that anger, which discloses that evaluative property. In both the case of non-emotional belief and non-emotional perception there is not affective intentionality of this sort.29 Stepping back from details of the view, is it plausible meta-emotional experience has evaluative content in this way? Consider the alternative, that the intentional content of metaemotional experience is non-evaluative, merely presenting non-evaluative properties of the target emotion. Possible candidates for the relevant non-evaluative properties could be facial profile, tone of voice, body language, verbal reports (as constitutive of the target emotion). However, the perceptualist would have to maintain that it is a misdescription of the phenomenology to say I typically experience a meta-emotional response to those nonevaluative physical features (and they are not present in reflexive cases; see section 4.1 for discussion). Further, even if those non-evaluative features of target emotions are present, I typically affectively respond to someone's aggressive posture as indicative of anger, or offensive tone as indicative of rudeness, and so those non-evaluative features of target emotions present as variously evaluatively qualified in meta-emotional experience. While more needs to be said to rule decisively in favour of the perceptualist claim here, if there is plausibility to the thought that meta-emotions involve evaluations of their target emotions, then the idea that meta-emotional experience typically has evaluative content is one plausible way of cashing this out. Moreover, in light of the above, the perceptualist view suggests not only that metaemotional experiences have evaluative content, but their evaluative content is distinct from that of their target emotion. Take embarrassment at a friend's anger about X. On the 29 I thank an anonymous referee for suggesting making this explicit. 15 perceptualist view, my friend's anger about X represents X as offensive, and therefore has an evaluative content we can approximately characterize as 'X is offensive'. Yet, my metaemotion of embarrassment at my friend's anger does not present this anger itself as offensive but is presented as embarrassing through felt disfavour toward it. However, a critic might object that it is incorrect to claim that meta-emotions have distinct evaluative content in this way. They might claim whatever evaluative content meta-emotions have, they inherit it, or 'catch it', from their target emotions. One might support this by pointing to an analogy with 'mirroring' emotions. Consider the following case. Say I am taking a flight, and there is unexpected heavy turbulence. I look to the flight attendant to gauge the situation and see they are petrified, which precipitates my becoming afraid. While my emotion (approximately) mirrors the evaluative content of the attendant's emotion – fear about the dangerous turbulence – this is not a meta-emotion of the kind under consideration. After all, I am not afraid of the attendant's emotion: my fear does not present the attendant's being petrified about the heavy turbulence as fearsome or dangerous; rather the turbulence is what is fearsome, not the target emotion. Such cases arguably involve emotional contagion, where becoming aware of someone else's emotional reaction to a particular object focuses my attention on the same object, and precipitates an emotion with approximately the same evaluative content. Put otherwise, I 'catch' the emotion, more specifically I 'catch' its content.30 So, mirroring emotions about the same object is not the same as having an emotional response to another emotion, even if the means by which I come to share someone's emotion is through attention to their emotion. As such, these cases pose no barrier to the perceptualist claim that the evaluative content of meta-emotions is distinct from that of their target emotions. In fact, consideration of such cases leads us to the following important claim. By claiming that the evaluative content of meta-emotions is distinct from that of their target emotion the perceptualist view taps into an important criterion for distinguishing meta-emotions from similar affective phenomena, such as emotional contagion or mirroring emotions, as considered above. To re-emphasize, one central aspect of those cases is that I 'catch' the evaluative content of their emotion. In the case considered above, that is the fearsomeness of the situation – I share in that fearsome appraisal, which as noted is categorically not what happens in meta-emotions. Furthermore, cases where the meta-emotional response and the target emotion are the same type – anger towards anger, or pity for pity – does not undermine this claim. The claim is about the token distinctness of the evaluative content of the metaemotion from that of the target emotion, and so the view need not deny that one's meta- 30 See Gordon 1996: 11-21. See Goldie 2000: 189-194. Understanding Meta-Emotions 16 emotional response can be of the same type as the target emotion without inheriting its evaluative content from that target emotion. Finally, consider meta-emotions as contrasted with empathetic responses, where there is some conscious attempt to share in the emotion of another subject, rather than a 'passive catching' as in emotional contagion cases. As Goldie defines empathy, it is a 'process by which a person centrally imagines the narrative (the thoughts, feelings, and emotions) of another person'.31 Consider the following example. A doctor, having met with a grief-stricken patient whose care they have been in charge of for some time, is writing up a psychological report. In doing so they seek to convey the character of the grief and imagine the narrative of their patient's emotion. Part of imaginatively inhabiting the perspective of the patient is imagining how the world seems to them in grief, and so the evaluative content of their grief (the loss of a loved one as grievous). In that sense, the relevant imaginative experience aims to take up the content, the 'thoughts, feelings and emotions' of the patient's experience, of what is another person. Whereas, according to the perceptual model, the evaluative content of the meta-emotional experience is not that of a different subject's experience, but precisely the subject undergoing the meta-emotional experience. 3.2 Normative status Building on this discussion we can note a distinctive feature of meta-emotions that the perceptual model has a substantive take on. Julien Deonna and Fabrice Teroni note, 'your disappointment regarding the anger you felt at being confronted with your wrongdoing might be the beginning of an assessment of your anger as inappropriate...'.32 Generalizing, the thought is that the meta-emotional response taps into something important about what I will call the 'normative status' of the target emotion. Let me explain this term in more detail and contrast it with, and relate it to, what has been said previously about the evaluative properties which meta-emotional experiences present their target emotions as having. In addition to the relevant evaluative properties, the disgusting, embarrassing, amusing, fearsome, offensive (etc.) there are also a range of normative properties, such as the justified, unjustified, warranted, unwarranted, appropriate, inappropriate. Let's focus on the notion of appropriateness. We need to be careful, however, because in the affective domain talk of appropriateness can mean different things. For example, anger towards a particular individual's behaviour might be prudentially inappropriate if the individual is our boss and is likely to look poorly on such an emotional display. Alternatively, we might think it morally 31 Goldie 2000: 195. 32 Deonna and Teroni 2012: 18. 17 inappropriate to feel a sense of admiration or awe for serial killers.33 However, the sense of appropriateness we can focus on in the present context is epistemic appropriateness, in terms of correctly representing the object as it evaluatively is. Applied to meta-emotions, the normative status of the target emotion – the anger I am embarrassed by – is a matter of whether the target emotion itself (the anger) is epistemically appropriate to its particular object (say the late waiter which is object of the anger), in terms of evaluative properties that particular object does or does not possess (i.e. whether the waiter's behaviour really is offensive or not, and so is, or is not, as the target emotion of anger presents it as being). The perceptualist model provides a distinctive take on these issues. Arguably some metaemotional experiences are not 'silent' with respect to the normative status of their target emotions. Rather, in addition to presenting the relevant evaluative properties of the target emotion itself, they also present the normative status of their target emotion. The way meta-emotions putatively do this can be described as follows: for some metaemotions, their felt valenced attitudinal component (felt favour or disfavour) is experienced as intelligibly motivated by the normative status of the target emotion. For example, in anger, I might experience felt disfavour as the appropriate (so intelligible) response to your jealousy about X. As such, it makes senses to be angrily responding as I am, insofar it seems to me that what partly constitutes that jealously being offensive is that jealousy about X itself is an inappropriate response to X. The meta-emotion would, therefore, have an intentional content approximating to 'inappropriate jealousy which is therefore offensive'. Alternatively, I might experience felt favour to be the appropriate (so intelligible) response to my indignation about X, such that it makes sense to be admirably responding as I am, insofar as it seems to me that what partly constitutes indignation being admirable is that it is the appropriate response to X. The meta-emotion would, therefore, have an intentional content approximating to 'appropriate indignation which is therefore admirable'. Note, on this picture, the normative status of target emotions is something that can be part of a way the object of a meta-emotional experience seems in a non-doxastic phenomenal sense. More generally, if normative properties can be non-doxastically directly presented in experience then, given our context, we might extend this to claims about meta-emotional experience. The contents of meta-emotions sensitive to the normative status of their target emotion would, of course, be more complex than otherwise, and perhaps a story might have to be told about such 'high-level' contents as including normative properties 'cognitively penetrating' non-doxastic experiences. Nonetheless, the perceptual model provides us with an interesting way of making sense of the claim that the normative status of the target emotions 33 See Tappolet 2016: Ch.3 for an overview of these different senses of appropriateness. Understanding Meta-Emotions 18 of meta-emotions can be part of what is experientially presented (although more need to be said on these issues). In further clarification of this picture, let me note two things. First, even if we accept that meta-emotions present the normative status of their target emotions, they need only do so sometimes. It is not plausible that meta-emotional responses always include this dimension, and the perceptualist model need not commit to this claim. Let me say more about the contrast here by way of an example. Say a teenager is out for a meal with their parents, and their father begins to remonstrate with the waiter, displaying anger. The teenager is overcome with embarrassment about their parent's emotion, and (on the perceptual model) it is experientially presented under the aspect of the embarrassing. It seems entirely possible that the teenager can undergo this meta-emotional experience without their experience having anything to say, so to speak, about the normative status of the target emotion itself. There might just be something about their parent displaying anger which they find embarrassing regardless, as it were. Alternatively, consider someone who experiences annoyance whenever they see that their colleagues are in a good mood. Again, there need be no experience of the normative status of the target emotion. Note, this reflects a phenomenological difference between cases. The precise explanation of why a meta-emotional experience may or may not have anything to say on the normative status of the target emotion will likely be highly dependent on the individual's affective psychology and context-specific features of the situation. Second, a critic might argue that while it is phenomenologically acceptable to say that subjects can be aware of target emotions as (in)appropriate in a given situation, nonetheless there is no requirement that I experience the normative status of the target emotion's object. Consider the following example. If in embarrassment I experience my friend's anger at the waiter as inappropriate, this may also involve a non-experiential fact-awareness that, for example, it wasn't the waiter's fault that the food arrived late, or that this isn't something worth getting angry about (the relevant evaluative property of 'offensiveness' or 'blameworthiness' not being instantiated). Yet, the waiter's being faultless – the normative status of the target emotion's object – doesn't itself need to be experientially presented ('disclosed') by my meta-emotion, but can be part of its putative cognitive base, in this case a belief on my part with a content that reflects the normative states of the target emotion's object.34 The perceptual model can concede that this is how the normative status of the target emotion's object is sometimes represented in meta-emotional experience, namely in a doxastic way. 34 I thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this objection. 19 4. Objections and Challenges 4.1 Reflexive and non-reflexive meta-emotions I now consider some further objections and challenges to the perceptual model applied to meta-emotions. First, let's remind ourselves of the basic vs non-basic distinction from section 2. There it was said that basic cases are those in which the target emotion is directly presented, non-basic cases being those in which the target emotion is merely represented indirectly.35 However, we might think there are two problems with this distinction for the perceptualist model. First, consider that the requirement of a direct presentation of the target emotion in basic cases of meta-emotional experience seems most applicable to contexts where we have two emotional subjects. For example, the subject of the target emotion (s1), where that target emotion is perceptually present to the subject of the meta-emotional response (s2). Yet, how do we have perceptual access to someone else's emotion in this way? Might there necessarily be a mediating thought to ground an inference from observed emotional behaviour to attribution of emotion, on the basis of which s1's emotion can become the target emotion of s2's meta-emotion? Such a mediating thought could involve analogical reasoning regarding the link between emotional behaviour and experience in my own case, which grounds that inference. Given this worry, basic case non-reflexive meta-emotions generate a version of the other minds problem, an inference-by-analogy answer to which threatens the analysis from section 2, insofar as these cases would necessarily involve indirect representations (i.e. thoughts or judgements), and so would ex hypothesi always be non-basic cases. Second, while this problem does not arise for reflexive meta-emotions – an inference from observed emotional behaviour to ascription is not required in my own case – in what sense is that target emotion directly present? The worry is that it is difficult to make sense of our own emotions being directly perceptually present, and so meta-emotions which target them would necessarily be non-basic cases.36 There are responses to these problems within the perceptualist framework. Taking the meta-emotion other minds problem first consider the following. It seems phenomenologically correct to say that we often experience emotionally expressive behaviour, including distinctive facial features and changes, as constituting the presence of emotions – at least when we have no reason to doubt emotional sincerity. Put otherwise, we seem to have access to other people's emotions; in favourable circumstances, we seem to 'see' the emotions of other people.37 As Joel Smith frames this 'perceptuality' claim, 'suitably placed and endowed 35 See Poellner 2016: 1-3 for discussion of derivative (i.e. indirect) cases within the perceptual model of emotion. 36 This taps into 'Howards Challenge' – see the end of the subsection. 37 See Goldie 2000: 182. Understanding Meta-Emotions 20 observes can perceive other's emotions'.38 In a typical statement of it, Quassim Cassam says 'what displays or manifestations of the anger do is to reveal his state of mind without being his state of mind; one perceived his anger by perceiving displays of it'.39 The motivations for the perceptuality claim are varied, but amongst them are the fact that we paradigmatically speak in this way; we say that we see the sadness in someone's crying, or someone's anger in their frown. Further to this, perception in such contexts may be read factively, and, as such, perception of others emotions would provide non-inferential knowledge of their emotions. Let me now say more about this picture. One point which bears emphasizing is that the relevant perception of emotion seems in an important respect different from the perception of the relevant emotional expression. We seem to have an instance of perceiving one thing in virtue of perceiving something else, as a kind of dependent perception. Building this into the perceptuality claim, we perceive the other's anger in virtue of perceiving their frown. Generalizing, we perceive the emotion as the emotion it is in virtue of perceiving the relevant expressive behaviour, which in some sense constitutes it. There is then a further question on how to cash out this form of dependent perception of emotion. Here is one proposal: we perceive the emotion of another subject as the emotion it is by perceiving something which is plausibly, and in part, constitutive of it, namely its expressive behaviour.40 Here is how one defender of the perceptual model articulates this claim: [T]he other's mental state in such cases is not, or not always, a 'distinct existence' from his directly given expressive behaviour, and merely contingently linked with it. Otherwise, my perceptual experience of the other's behaviour would not give me direct perceptual access to that mental state. The claim has to be that the other's expressive behaviour is at least sometimes part of his relevant mental state, such that that mental state is itself, in the right circumstances, perceptually given to me in my perceptual access to the other's expressive behaviour. (Poellner 2016: 24)41 Applied to non-reflexive meta-emotions, we now get the following claim: in favourable circumstances, non-reflexive meta-emotions involve non-inferential perceptual access to the 38 Smith 2018: 130. 39 Cassam 2007: 165; See also Green 2007: 89; Goldie 2000: 182 40 Cf. Smith 2018: 130-48 who rejects this 'part-whole' proposal based on issues concerning the ontological status of emotions vs emotional expressions. 41 See also Stein 1980: 87,89. 21 relevant target emotion insofar as that target emotion is perceptually given to me in virtue of my perceptual experience of the relevant expressive behaviour, which is a constitutive part of that target emotion. A full defence of this view about our access to others' emotions is beyond the scope of this paper, but let me note a related issue. Remember the claim of the perceptual model is not merely that one has a direct presentation of the relevant target emotion, but rather that one has a perceptual experience as of evaluative properties of the relevant target emotion (and in some cases the normative status). As such, the 'perceptuality' claim applied to meta-emotions would be as follows. Suitably placed and endowed observers can, on the basis of their metaemotional experiences, perceive evaluative properties of other's emotions' in virtue of having a perceptual experience of the relevant emotional expression. So, while basic case nonreflexive meta-emotions would have, as their relevant cognitive base, this form of perception of another emotion (making them not self-standing intentional relations to those target emotions), they may well still be self-standing intentional relations to the evaluative properties of those target emotions. According to the perceptual model, the distinctive contribution of the meta-emotion, therefore, is the affective presentation of the target emotion as having the relevant evaluative properties. While not deprived of intuitive plausibility more needs to be said on this issue.42 However, what has been said is enough to meet the worry that in basic non-reflexive cases the meta-emotional subject also needs to have an indirect representation to the effect of entertaining a mediating thought about emotionally expressive behaviour (one with the content 'in my case, so the same in this case) – which grounds some purported inference to ascription. This is not the case, given what has been said about the perceptuality claim, so such cases can still be classified as basic cases on the perceptual model. Moving on, what about the problem of perceptual presence for reflexive meta-emotions? What the perceptualist should say is that the target emotion – in this case, my own – is directly experienced insofar as its occurrent instantiation, as experientially present, motivates the meta-emotional response. Expanding on this, I experience an emotion, and then, as part of a temporally extended emotional event, experience that emotion as motivating a metaemotional response, which has as its target the first emotion (e.g. my anger about X motivating embarrassment about that anger). So, in such cases, the prior experiential presence of the 42 See Poellner 2016: 24-6 on this. I thank an anonymous referee for pushing me to say more about this. Understanding Meta-Emotions 22 target emotion plays the same role in underwriting intentional causality that the perceptual presence of the target emotion plays in non-reflexive cases. 43 The above analysis also addresses the related objection that I do not (and perhaps cannot) synchronously experience two affective states – my own emotion, say anger, and at the same time a meta-emotional response of embarrassment about that anger. This seems typically correct, but given the above, reflexive meta-emotions on the perceptualist model need not contravene this. Moreover, in basic reflexive cases, there is no need to suppose any introspective act takes place. In line with the analysis in section 2, the meta-emotional response is a first-order intentional experience directed toward the relevant target emotion. Keeping the above analysis in mind the perceptual model now also has the resources to meet the objection that while the idea of affectively perceiving another emotion seems applicable in non-reflexive cases, we do not 'perceive' anything in reflexive cases. Remember that an 'affective-perceptual experience of value' when applied to meta-emotions is understood as referring to a felt disclosure of value. So, as long as the target emotion was experientially present in the reflexive case (in the sense defined above), then the perceptualist will argue that it is available to be taken up by a meta-emotional response. As such, the perceptual model of meta-emotions, so understood, can arguably deal with both non-reflexive and reflexive cases as types of basic cases, as long as 'affective-perceptual experience of value' is not read, with respect to the reflexive case, as having to literally involve a senseperceptual experience of the target emotion as instantiated in the subject's external environment. Finally, what has been said allows us to meet 'Howards Challenge'. Remember the challenge is for any theory of emotions, applied to meta-emotion, to explain basic case reflexive meta-emotions in such a way as to respect the fact that they can be self-standing intentional relations to the emotions which they are about (not requiring separate cognitive bases). Given the framework for thinking about basic case reflexive meta-emotions above, the perceptualist model can respect this. The basic case reflexive meta-emotion need not involve a sense-perceptual experience of the target emotion as a 'cognitive base' state (much less a judgement that it has obtained). Rather, to re-emphasize, what plays the role that senseperception plays in the non-reflexive basic cases, is the way I experience the relevant target emotion, which is my own, and then, as part of a temporally extended emotional event, experience that occurrent emotion as motivating a meta-emotional response. The target emotion is in this sense directly presented on the basis of prior experiential presence. 43 This is not to claim we cannot be mistaken about the target emotion in reflexive cases. There is no commitment to the idea that we have incorrigible knowledge of our emotions. 23 4.ii Epistemic issues Epistemological challenges can be raised against the perceptualist model of meta-emotions as expressed by the following questions. (1) Do meta-emotional experiences have standards of correctness in the same way as typical intentional states, and (2) what (if any) evaluative judgements might a meta-emotional experience give one reason for. One of the standard motivations for the perceptual model of the emotions is a putative epistemic analogy between emotional and paradigmatic sense-perceptual experience. It is claimed emotions can play the same (or similar) rationalizing role as sense-perceptual experience by constituting reasons, and so defeasible justification, for corresponding evaluative beliefs.44 Do similar ideas carry over for meta-emotional experience? Taking (1) first, we might frame a standard of correctness for meta-emotions on the perceptual model as follows: Standard of correctness for meta-emotions: a meta-emotion is justified iff the target emotion really has the evaluative property it is represented as having. To see how the above standard of correctness could be met take the following example: embarrassment at my anger towards X – which is experienced as disclosing the target emotion as embarrassing – is correct iff anger towards X really is embarrassing. However, what (if anything) determines whether 'anger towards X' is, in fact, embarrassing? We might answer that a whole range of considerations could go into determining whether a particular emotional display of anger is, in fact, embarrassing, such as social context and norms. Although one important consideration is the normative status of the target emotion. Remember, target emotions have a normative status, specified in terms of the relation of epistemic appropriateness between the target emotion and its objects evaluative properties, i.e. whether the target emotion itself is epistemically appropriate to the way its object is. This is plausibly something that we can investigate ('was X really offensive and so worthy of the angry response?'), and this seems an important consideration, alongside others, in determining whether the target emotion itself possesses the relevant evaluative property represented by the meta-emotional response. This is reflected in the common-sense thought that we think it more justified to respond with embarrassment to anger if the anger itself was inappropriate in the circumstances. However, the perceptual model claimed that in certain cases meta-emotions themselves can be sensitive to this normative status. In those cases, there would be the possibility of a 44 On Epistemic Perceptualism see Tappolet 2012: 205-22; Döring 2007: 363-94; Cowan 2016: 59-81, (cf. Brady 2013: Ch.3). Understanding Meta-Emotions 24 meta-emotion veridically presenting the normative status of its target emotion, insofar as it picked up on that relation of appropriateness between that target emotion and evaluative properties of its object. However, note how complex the standard of correctness ends up being. What is required for veridicality on this score is an accurate meta-emotional representation of (a) the target emotion's object evaluative properties (b) the target emotion's evaluative take on its object, and so its evaluative content, and (c) the relation between (a) and (b), which arguably constitutes the target emotions normative status (whether it was appropriate to its object qua possessing the relevant evaluative property). Getting this right is a complex requirement for justification since there is a variety of possible misrepresentation. Further, can all this representational work be cashed out in terms of the affective intentionality of meta-emotions, as purported affective disclosures of the normative properties of their target emotions? The perceptual model is committed to saying that such a thing is not only possible but central to capturing the 'assessorial' character of a proportion of metaemotional experience (see 3.2). The perceptualist might suggest that being able to articulate how one could have justified meta-emotions which are sensitive to the normative status of their target emotions is a promising feature of their model. So, while there is the possibility of various misrepresentations, there is also the possibility of satisfying the conditions. And while more would be required to defend this aspect of the view in full, the perceptualist has resources to draw on. The perceptual model also has a response to question (2) above, which asks what evaluative judgements might a meta-emotional experience give one reason for. The natural response would be that meta-emotional experience gives one a prima facie (provisional) reason to judge that the target emotion has the evaluative properties it is represented as having (e.g., insofar as I experience embarrassment toward your anger at X, then that gives me a prima facie reason to judge that anger at X is embarrassing). More interestingly, however, in those cases where there is a purported experiential disclosure of normative status, those meta-emotional experiences would give one a prima facie reason to judge that the target emotion has the normative status it is presented as having – as epistemically appropriate (or not) to its object. If the latter view is defensible, some metaemotions would have a distinctive role to play in being experiential guides in reflective assessments of the normative status of the relevant target emotion. I now say more about this feature and how the perceptualist model explains it. Taking a step back, consider that much of our reflective assessment of our and others' emotions consists in normative judgements about the epistemic appropriateness (or not) of the relevant target emotion. This is expressed in claims to the effect that particular instances or fear, embarrassment, pride, etc., were (in)appropriate, in the sense of (not) matching the 'way things evaluatively are'. Yet, if meta-emotions can be the 'beginning' of an assessment 25 concerning the normative status of our and others' emotions, then they pre-reflectively tap into that normative status, that is prior to reflective assessment. Let me flesh this out with an example to clarify the distinction between reflective assessment and pre-reflective meta-emotional assessment. Take again the example of being embarrassed at the anger of my friend towards the waiter concerning the long delay in the arrival of the entrée. Arguably, and as was outlined in section 3.2, that anger can prereflectively seem inappropriate – it can seem not to fit the situation as my meta-emotional experience presents it. We might, therefore, talk of meta-emotions as seeming to disclose the normative status of the target emotion as an 'assessorial hunch'. Contrastingly later that evening, after my friend has calmed down, I reflect on what happened. I consider whether it might have been the case that the lateness was the waiter's fault, that it was offensive in a certain respect, and that therefore the anger of my friend may have been epistemically appropriate. Say my friend informs me that he saw the waiter go out for a cigarette just as our food was put up to the pass and that when he came back he was more concerned to converse with his colleges than bring the food. Made aware of this, I might draw a different conclusion to the 'assessorial hunch' of my meta-emotional experience. I might judge that anger was, in fact, appropriate, and that my meta-emotion of embarrassment, which seemed to disclose otherwise, was not sufficiently sensitive to a range of evaluatively-relevant considerations. The perceptual model of meta-emotions explains this contrast between a reflective assessment of emotions normative status and a meta-emotional 'assessment' by providing a way of theorizing the relevant class of experiences and their assessorial dimension.45 A further interesting point on these issues is that insofar as we can draw the above distinction then the normative status which is seemingly pre-reflectively disclosed in some meta-emotional experience could figure as what we might call an 'experiential guide' in those further reflections. Put in more philosophical terms, the 'assessorial hunch' of the metaemotional response would be a defeasible reason for making a normative judgement about the epistemic appropriateness (or not) of the relevant target emotion.46 Say, amending the example above, no such evaluatively-relevant considerations come to light that might justify finding the waiter's lateness offensive. In such a case, I might come to the reflective assessment that things were normatively as my meta-emotional experience presented them as 45 For further discussion of the role meta-emotions play in explaining the criteria by which we regulate our emotional responses see Howard 2015: 3; Mendonça 2013: 390-396; Jäger and Bänninger-Huber 2015: 805-808. 46 For a discussion of the epistemic advantage for meta-emotions over non-emotional evaluative judgements about emotions see Howard 2015: 11, 17. Understanding Meta-Emotions 26 being. As such, we should take these purposed experiential disclosures of the normative status of the relevant target emotion seriously, as a consideration to be weighed in a reflective assessment. Meta-emotional responses would, therefore, have a significant role to play in an 'all things considered' assessment. Conclusion In this paper, I have clarified the central features of meta-emotions and surveyed the prospects of the perceptual model as applied to them. It has been argued that the perceptual model provides us with a theoretical framework within which to articulate what is distinctive about meta-emotions and their role in our emotional lives. Yet, while the perceptual model provides a distinctive way of theorizing these states, it faces challenges. The view has resources to draw on, yet more needs to be said for a full defence. Let me summarise the key challenges that are still faced: (1) articulating in more detail the claim that the normative status of target emotions can be experientially disclosed in meta-emotional experience, without thoughts or judgments; (2) a fully developed meta-emotional epistemology which expands on the reflections provided in 4.2, further detailing the distinctive epistemic roles of meta-emotions regarding how we assess affective states; and (3) the broader role of meta-emotional experiences in the affective domain, including their connection to the development of metaemotional dispositions and recalcitrant meta-emotions. As a final point, those who are sceptical about the perceptual model, and its extension to meta-emotions, should explain how their preferred theory can capture the distinctive features of meta-emotions as outlined here. References Barlassina, L and Newen A. (2014) 'The Role of Bodily Perception in Emotion: In Defense of an Impure Somatic Theory' in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 83 (3), 637-78. Bartsch, A., Appel, M., and Storch, D. (2010). 'Predicting emotions and metaemotions at the movies' in Communication Research, 37 (2), 167–90. Brady, M. (2007) 'Recalcitrant Emotions and Visual Illusions' in American Philosophical Quarterly 44 (3), 273-84. –– (2013) Emotional Insight: The Epistemic Role of Emotional Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Cassam, Q. (2007) The Possibility of Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Cowan, R. (2016) 'Epistemic Perceptualism and Neo-Sentimentalist Objections' in Canadian Journal of Philosophy 46 (1), 59-81. Crane, T. (1998) 'Intentionality as the Mark of the Mental' in A. O'Hear (ed.), Contemporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 229-51. Deonna, J. and Teroni, F. (2012) The Emotions: A Philosophical Introduction. London: Routledge. Dokic, J. and Lemaire, S. (2015) 'Are Emotions Evaluative Modes?' in dialectica 69 (3), 271-92. 27 Döring, S. (2007) 'Seeing What to Do: Affective Perception and Rational Motivation' in dialectica 61 (3), 363-94. –– (2014) 'Why Recalcitrant Emotions Are Not Irrational' in S. Roeser and C. Todd (eds) Emotion and Value, 124-36. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Döring, S. and Lutz, A. (2015) 'Beyond Perceptualism: Introduction to the Special Issue' in dialectica 69 (3), 259-70. Eisenberg, N. (1996). 'Metaemotion and socialization of emotion in the family – A topic whose time has come: Comment on Gottman et al. (1996)' in Journal of Family Psychology 10 (3), 269–76. Ekman, P. (1999) 'Basic Emotions' in T. Dalgleish and T. Power (eds) The handbook of cognition and emotion, 45-60. Chichester: John Wiley. Frijda, N. (1987) The Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Goldie, P. (2000) The Emotions: A Philosophical Exploration. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Gordon, R. (1996) 'Radical Simulation', in Carruthers, C. and Smith, P. K. (eds) Theories of Theories of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 11-21. Green, M. (2007). Self-Expression. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Helm, B. W. (2001) 'Emotions and Practical Reason: Rethinking Evaluation and Motivation' in Noûs 35 (2), 190-213. Howard, S. A. (2015) 'Metaemotional Intentionality' in Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 97 (2), 1-23. Jäger, C., and Bartsch, A. (2006) 'Meta-emotions' in Grazer Philosophische Studien 73 (1), 179–204. Jäger, C. and Bänninger-Huber, E. (2015) 'Looking into meta-emotions' in Synthese 192 (1), 787-811. James, W. (1884) 'What is an Emotion' in Mind 9(34), 188-205. Johnston, M. (2001) 'The Authority of Affect' in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 63 (1), 181–214. Kenny, A. (1963) Action, Emotion and Will. London: Routledge. Koven, N. S. (2011) 'Specificity of metaemotion effects on moral decision making' in Emotion 11 (5), 1255–61. Lambie, J. (2009) 'Emotion Experience, Rational Action, and Self-Knowledge', in Emotion Review 1 (3): 272-80. Marcel, A. J., and Lambie, J. A. (2002) 'Consciousness and the Varieties of Emotion Experience: A Theoretical Framework', in Psychological Review 109 (2), 219-59. Mendonça, D. (2013) 'Emotions about Emotions' in Emotion Review 5 (4), 390–6. Mitmansgruber, H., Beck, T. N., Höfer, S., & Schüssler, G. (2009). 'When you don't like what you feel: Experiential avoidance, mindfulness and metaemotion in emotion regulation' in Personality and Individual Differences 46 (4), 448–53. Norman, E. and Furner, B. (2016) 'The Concept of \"Metaemotion\": What is There to Learn From Research on Metacognition?' in Emotion Review 8 (2), 187-93. Nussbaum, C. N. (2001) Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Poellner, P. (2016) 'Phenomenology and the Perceptual Model of Emotion' in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. CXVI, Part 3. Understanding Meta-Emotions 28 Searle, J. (1983) Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. New York: Cambridge University Press. Solomon, R. (1976) The Passions. Doubleday. Smith, J (2018) 'The Perceptibility of Emotion' in Narr, H and Teroni, F. (eds.) The Ontology of Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 130-48. Stein, E. (1980) On the Problem of Empathy. Washington DC: ICS Publications. Stocker, M. (2010) 'Intellectual and Other Nonstandard Emotions' in P. Goldie (ed) The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Emotion, 401-23. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Tappolet, C. (2012) 'Emotions, Perceptions, and Emotional Illusions' in Calabi, C. (ed) Perceptual Illusion: Philosophical and Psychological Essays. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 205-22. Teroni, F. (2007) 'Emotions and Formal Objects' in dialectica 61 (3), 395-415. Zagzebski, L. (2003) 'Emotion and Moral Judgement' in Philosophy and the Phenomenological Research 66 (1): 104-124."}
{"meta": {"title": "Unity in the Variety of Quotation", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/article", "creator": "Ray, Greg", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "This chapter argues that while quotation marks are polysemous, the thread that runs through all uses of quotation marks that involve reference to expressions is pure quotation, in which an expression formed by enclosing another expression in quotation marks refers to that enclosed expression.  We defend a version of the so-called disquotational theory of pure quotation and show how this device is used in direct discourse and attitude attributions, in exposition in scholarly contexts, and in so-called mixed quotation in indirect discourse and attitude attributions.  We argue that uses of quotation marks that extend beyond pure quotation have two features in common. First, the expressions appearing in quotation marks are intended to be understood, and that they are intended to be understood is essential to the function that such quotations play in communication, though this does not always involve the expressions contributing their extensional properties to fixing truth conditions for the sentences in which they appear.  Second, they appeal to a relation to the expression appearing in quotation marks that plays a role in determining the truth conditions of the sentences in which they appear.", "date": "2018", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/LUDUIT", "language": "en", "datestamp": "2020-04-02T08:17:29Z"}, "text": "PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 1 Unity in the Variety of Quotation Kirk Ludwig, Indiana University, ludwig@indiana.edu, 812-855-2404 Greg Ray, University of Florida, gregray@ufl.edu, 352-392-2084 ext. 3-1816 Abstract This chapter argues that while quotation marks are polysemous, the thread that runs through all uses of quotation marks that involve reference to expressions is pure quotation, in which an expression formed by enclosing an expression in quotation marks refers to the enclosed expression. We defend a version of the so-called disquotational theory of pure quotation and show how this device is used in direct discourse and attitude attributions, in exposition in scholarly contexts, and in so-called mixed quotation in indirect discourse and attitude attributions. In quotation not only does language turn on itself, but it does so word by word and expression by expression, and this reflexive twist is inseparable from the convenience and universal applicability of the device. –Donald Davidson 1 Introduction Quotation is easy to understand but hard to explain. In this paper, we offer a semantics for the varieties of quotation listed in (1)-(5). (1) \"Boston\" contains six letters. (2) \"psychology\" literally means \"the study of the soul.\" (3) (a) He said, \"Get serious, boy.\" (b) She said, \"Gorse is common in Scotland\"; she did not say, \"Furze is common in Scotland.\" (c) Caesar literally said, \"Veni, Vidi, Vici,\" not \"I came, I saw, I conquered.\" (d) He said, 'All mimsy were the borogroves,\" but didn't have anything in mind by it. (e) Then Jesus said to them, \"Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.\" (f) \"Good morning! it was kind of you to push the chair up that hill ... I hope it wasn't heavy for you,\" said Connie, looking back at the keeper outside the door. (g) Davidson said, \"Quotation is a device used to refer to typographical ... shapes by exhibiting samples.\" (h) \"And what is the use of a book,\" thought Alice, \"without pictures or conversation?\" (i) \"If I had a child!\" she thought to herself; \"if I had him inside me as a child!\" (4) (a) In this chapter, Mill attempts to delineate when the authority of society can rightly limit individuality and the \"sovereignty of the individual over himself.\" PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 2 (b) Berkeley's objective in the New Theory of Vision was \"to shew the manner wherein we perceive by sight the distance, magnitude, and situation of objects. Also to consider the difference there is betwixt the ideas of sight and touch, and whether there be any idea common to both senses\" (NTV §1). (c) They substituted, as Kant has pointed out, \"a physiology of the human understanding\" for the Critical investigation of the claims of reason, and anthropology for ethics. (5) (a) Macomber said that he \"bolted like a rabbit.\" (b) Alice said that she had \"heard nonsense\" compared with which that would be \"as sensible as a dictionary.\" (c) She said that it had been many years since \"such trifles had broke across the web of [her] solitude.\" (d) Rochefoucauld said that jealousy \"ends as soon as we pass from suspicion to certainty.\" (e) Professor Elugardo said that Williams James said that religious leaders are \"creatures of exalted emotional sensibility.\" (f) She thought that it was curious that that \"thin, proud man\" should have had \"that little, sharp woman for a mother!\" (1) is an instance of pure quotation.1 (2) involves pure quotation in its first appearance and arguably a dual use-mention (to be explained below) in its second appearance. Examples in (3ag) illustrate direct discourse. (3a) is an instance of the use of quotation in dialogue in which understanding the quoted material is essential to its linguistic function (as is made clear by the fact that in translation dialogue inside quotation marks is translated as well). However, (3b) illustrates a strict use of direct discourse that requires the use of the words used by the subject. (3c-d) illustrate a strict use in which the function of the report does not require its speaker to understand 1 The term 'pure quotation' was introduced into the contemporary semantic literature on quotation by Cappelan and Lepore (1997), who contrast it with direct (3a-g) and indirect speech, and mixed cases of direct and indirect speech (5a-e). They are picking up on a distinction drawn in (Davidson 1979), where Davidson contrasts the idea of quotation used to mention an expression that is not itself used with what he calls mixed cases of use and mention. It is the first half of this contrast that Cappelen and Lepore have in mind, namely, the use of quotation marks around an expression to form an expression that refers to the enclosed expression, which is not at the same time used, and which functions \"like a single word\" (Davidson 1979, p. 3). More precisely, what we have in mind is given by (Q) below. This is the predominant use of the term 'pure quotation' in the literature on quotation. For a different suggestion about what contrast should be drawn with 'pure quotation' see (Saka 2013)-though contrast (Maier 2014) writing for the same journal a year later. Saka claims it is \"an analytic truth that all quotations that are not mixed must be pure\" and so includes direct speech under 'pure quotation'. But it should be noted that Cappelen and Lepore introduce the term stipulatively, so what counts as an analytic truth with regard to the usage they introduce depends on what meaning they give it. Our view about the relations between these various uses of quotation marks will emerge in the sequel. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 3 the words attributed to its subject, or, in the case of (3d), that it have any meaning at all. (To avoid confusion in discussion of direct and indirect discourse, we will use 'speaker' for the utterer of a sentence and 'subject' for the person the sentence is about.) In contrast, (3e) is an instance of direct speech in which the quoted words are a translation from the Greek of the Gospel of Mark, which in turn translate the Aramaic of Jesus, and understanding them is essential to its function. (3f-g) exhibit the use of ellipsis (in different ways in each) and exclamation marks in reported speech (in (3f)), and highlight the need to make sense of punctuation marks inside quotation marks in an account of the function of quotation in dialogue and direct speech. (3h-i) are examples of the use of quotation in the analog of direct speech for the attribution of thought. (4a-b) exhibit uses of quotation in scholarly exposition in which there is a dual use-mention. (4c) shows a use in which the quoted material is a translation of the original German. (5a-c) are examples of \"mixed quotation\" in which quotation marks are used in the complement clauses of indirect discourse. (5b) raises the problem of how to handle multiple instances. (5c) raises the question of how to handle interpolations-authorial brackets-that adjust context sensitive terms to the speaker's context. (5d) shows an example in which the quoted material is a translation of the original. (5e) raises the problem of iterated mixed quotation. (5f) shows these issues extend to attitude attributions. We argue that pure quotation is what unifies all of these uses of quotation in the sense that an account of the semantic function of quotation in each of these examples involves an instance of the device characteristic of pure quotation. We follow John Wallace (1970, 135-136) in holding that the semantic rule for pure quotation is given by the reference clause (Q), where 'φ' takes on expressions as values, and we use square brackets as Quinean corner quotes.2 (Q) For any φ, ['φ'] refers to φ.3 This is a precise expression of Tarski's informal account of the function of quotation marks.4 Anyone who understands this rule understands all there is to know about the use of quotation 2 An expression consisting of square brackets (treated as corner quotes) around an expression containing a metalinguistic variable abbreviates a description of an expression as the concatenation of the contained expressions and value of the variable, in the order in which they appear inside the brackets. Thus, ['f'] = the result of writing ''' followed by f and then '''. [φ and y] = the result of writing φ followed by 'and' and then y. And so on. An expression consisting of square brackets around an expression without a contained metalinguistic variable denotes that expression. Thus, [Quine] = the result of writing 'Quine'. And, [φ] = the result of writing φ. 3 We suppress explicit relativization of semantic predicates to a language except where it is needed. 4 Tarski writes, \"We denote by this term ['quotation-mark names'] every name of a sentence (or of any other, even meaningless, expression) which consists of quotation marks, leftand righthand, and the expression which lies between them, and which (expression) is the object denoted by the name in question\" (1983, p. 156). The rule is expressed here. He later writes, \"Quotationmarks names may be treated like single words of a language, and thus like syntactically simple PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 4 marks in pure quotation. In the following, we sketch an account of the semantic roles of the varieties of quotation in (2)-(5), which shows that the device involved in pure quotation plays a central role in each. This will not quite be to say that quotation marks mean the same thing in each of these uses, but rather that, as we will suggest, quotation marks are polysemous, and the thread that runs through the various uses of quotation marks is captured in a generalization of (Q) we introduce below. The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 takes up pure quotation. We review desiderata on an adequate account, and five proposals that have been made about how to understand pure quotation. We argue for the disquotational theory, as it has come to be called, which invokes a simple rule like that expressed in (Q). We head off some misunderstandings, respond to some objections, and draw out some consequences. Section 3 takes up the use of quotation marks in direct discourse. In section 3.1, we first identify a number of contexts in which expressions are referred to but also intended to be understood, where being understood is essential for sentences in which they are contained to fulfill their function in communication, though their extensional properties do not contribute to fixing the truth conditions of the sentences in which they are contained. We call this a quasi-use-mention. We argue that it extends to the use of quotation marks following 'means' in (2), and then, in section 3.2, to certain uses of quotation marks with direct discourse as well, though this is not a feature that is represented in a compositional account of the truth conditions of the sentences. We distinguish between strict and non-strict forms of direct discourse, the former of which requires mentioning the specific words used by the person to whom the discourse is attributed (the subject) and the latter of which allows the use of expressions that translate the words the subject used. We provide truth conditions for both strict and non-strict direct discourse. Non-strict direct discourse also involves quasi-usemention though this is not represented in the truth conditions. In section 3.3, the account is extended to direct attitude attributions as illustrated by (3h-i). Section 4 takes up quotation in exposition as illustrated in (4a-c) where what is said is said by the speaker or writer, though some of the words, in quotation marks, are to be attributed to another. Section 5, takes up mixed indirect discourse in section 5.1 and mixed attitude attribution in section 5.2. A general account is provided for any number of distinct uses of quotation marks in complements of indirect discourse or attitude attributions. Here too we distinguish between a strict and a non-strict reading. Section 6 takes up the question how to accommodate mixed indirect discourse in which expressions in quotation marks appear to be intended to be evaluated in a context other than that of the speaker. This would make 'x said that' what Kaplan called a 'monstrous operator', one which shifts the context of evaluation of context sensitive expressions from the speaker's context to another context. Without expressions\" (p. 159). It is this last remark in particular that has led to the ascription of the proper name theory of quotation to Tarski, though it is noteworthy that he says that they \"may be treated\" that way, not that they are syntactically simple. The important point for his purposes is that quotation terms function like names in the language in the sense of not having semantic compositional structure. See Gómez-Torrente (2001) and in this volume. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 5 trying to settle whether the examples that motivate this are well-formed, we show that there is nothing problematic about giving truth conditions for them. A language could make provision for this. Section 7 takes up a prima facie objection to the account that rests on the fact that when we translate, e.g., dialogue in a novel, we do not preserve reference to the expressions in the original language. The answer is that ordinary translation preserves function over reference when there is a conflict. Section 8 is a brief summary and conclusion. 2 Pure Quotation By pure quotation we have in mind a device in written language for referring to expressions.5 Expressions are strings or configurations of symbols, including the limiting case of one. We use 'expression' and 'symbol' in the sense in which they are used in logic.6 We can speak of complex symbols, so 'symbol' and 'expression' can be used interchangeably, but we will often use 'symbol' when we focus on a smallest unit in a symbol system. Expressions are types, and they are realized 5 There is nothing that prevents a similar device from being used in spoken or signed language, or any other medium of communication. For example, the device in the artificial language Lojban (see below) makes provision for spoken quotation, and in spoken languages, people will, transferring the device designed for writing to speech, say \"quote\", utter some word or phrase, and then \"unquote,\" or use so-called finger quotes. But the device is especially well suited to the written word and it is with the written word that it originated. Marks for indicating text trace their lineage back to the second century B.C. in the diple, an arrow-like mark '>', used as a proofreading device at the Library of Alexandria by the editor and librarian Aristarchus. But quotation marks in the form widely used today attained their modern form and function only in the last half of the 18th century, driven by experimentation with methods for setting off dialogue in novels (Houston 2013, pp. 187-210). There are other uses (or abuses) of quotation marks, such as scare (or shudder) quotes to indicate that the word in quotation marks is being used in a non-standard sense or in a sense that the writer herself would not use the word or words to express (e.g., the Onion headline 'Jacques Derrida \"dies\"'), and quotation marks used to identify a word being defined in a contextual definition, a purpose for which italics are also used (e.g., 'A boondoggle/\"boondoggle\" is a braided cord worn by Boy Scouts as a neckerchief slide, hatband, or ornament'). Another use is the so-called emphatic use of quotation marks for emphasis in ads and signs in the way that italics often are, as in, for example: '\"Fresh\" Seafood', and 'Lane may be \"slippery\" due to oiling'. In these uses, while the quotation marks are used to draw attention to a word, the word itself in quotation marks is not an object about which the sentences says anything, and is not used in determining whether it is true or false. The quotation marks function a bit like meta-remarks about the primary work that the sentence is doing but without being incorporated into its content or being the content of a distinct meta-level speech act. In this respect, it is like the conventional implicature of using 'but' in the place of 'and' to suggest a contrast between what is expressed before and after 'but' (see Predelli 2003 on this in connection with scare quotes). We therefore set these uses of quotation marks aside. 6 While it is an interesting question what the analysis of the concept of a symbol or expression is in the sense in which it is used in logic, this is not a task we take up on this paper, any more than we take up the analysis of the concept of a language, or a word, or a sentence. Our focus is on devices for referring to expressions, not the analysis of what they refer to. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 6 in tokens, typically spoken, signed, or written. Expressions are not intrinsically meaningful, and need not appear in any actual language. For example, 'f&r©n#th§' is an expression but does not have a meaning or appear in any natural language. As we are interested in quotation in written language, we focus on written expressions, that is, inscription types and their tokens. Inscription types are determinants of expression types. The letters, words, phrases, and sentences in this paper (tokens of which you are reading) are examples. A characteristic feature of quotation, as we are interested in it, is that it involves the construction of a term for an expression by incorporating the expression itself. A standard form for quotation involves flanking an expression with other expressions, which we call quotation marks. Using '...' as a placeholder for an expression, examples are: '...' or \"...\" English „...\" Dutch, Romanian, Polish „...\" or ‚...' Lithuanian, Macedonian, Icelandic «...» or ‹...› French, German, Russian ›...‹ or »...« Hungarian, Polish, Danish 『...』or「...」 Chinese, Japanese, Korean lu ... li'u Lojban (an artificial language)7 We will call expressions of these forms quotations or quotation terms. We will use single and double quotation marks for illustration. When we intend pure quotation henceforth we will use single quotation marks. We will use double quotation marks for other forms of quotation. The treatment extends straightforwardly to other styles of quotation marks, like those listed, as well as to using a special font, for example, italics, or underlining/overlining. In the following, we will use 'QUOT(f)' to mean the result of performing an appropriate syntactic operation on f so as to yield a quotation term incorporating f (where as above 'f' is a metalinguistic variable that takes expressions as values). In pure quotation, quotation marks flank an expression, and the quotation term so formed refers to the expression enclosed in quotation marks. Call the position of f in an expression QUOT(f) a quotation context. Thus, we say an expression occurs in an quotation context iff it occupies the position of f in an expression of the form QUOT(f). For the purposes of this section, let this be understood as a pure quotation context. There are a number of observations that theories of pure quotation should accommodate: 1. Quotation contexts are opaque, that is, (a) you cannot in general intersubstitute coreferring or coextensive terms in quotation contexts salva veritate, (b) you cannot existentially 7 Lojban's quotation marks can be used in speech or in writing indifferently. In distinction from natural languages, grammatical instances are restricted to containing expressions in a recursively specified syntax for Lojban. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 7 generalize, and (c) you cannot bind argument positions in f when it appears in a quotation context from outside that context. 2. Quotation can be used to introduce new symbols or expressions and to refer to expressions that are not in the language one is using, without introducing those expressions independently of the quotation term. 3. In pure quotation, QUOT(f) refers (non-accidentally) to the expression in its quotation context. 4. In understanding quotation devices, e.g., quotation marks, (a) one understands how to generate and understand a potential infinity of new expressions, and (b) one has the capacity to understand novel quotation terms, in the sense of being able to determine what they refer to, on the basis of recognition of the quotation term itself.8 Another condition sometimes placed on a theory quotation is that it make sense of the possibility that words can be used and mentioned simultaneously. This is not, however, a feature of pure quotation. We return to the case of dual use and mention in quotation below. According to a standard taxonomy, the five main theories of pure quotation are the name theory, the description theory, the demonstrative theory, the identity (or use) theory, and the disquotation theory.9 We endorse what has been called the disquotation theory, if not everything that has been said about it. The disquotation theory is easy to state. It asserts that we grasp everything that we need to know about how pure quotation devices function in grasping the following rule (GQ) (generalizing (Q)): (GQ) For any expression f, QUOT(f) refers to f. This handles all of the desiderata above. (GQ) obviously explains why QUOT(f) refers nonaccidentally to the expression in the quotation context, #3. The fact that intersubstituting in quotation contexts leads to a change of reference explains why one can't intersubstitute coreferring terms salva veritate, #1a. The fact that the contained expression is not functioning semantically explains why you can't existentially generalize or bind argument places, #1b-c. 10 8 This is related to Quine's remark that \"a quotation is not a description but a hieroglyph; it designates its object not by describing it in terms of other objects, but by picturing it\" (Quine 1940, p. 26). While we aim to capture what seems right about this thought, that a quotation term contains the type to which it refers, we do not treat quotation as literally picturing what it designates. The device is actually simpler than that suggests. 9 A useful overview of the literature can be found in (Saka 2013). We don't review every theory in the following. 10 In connection with this, it is worth noting that, contra Saka (2013, p. 941), our view is not that quotation marks represent a function that takes an argument and yields a value. As just noted, the PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 8 The fact that the rule quantifies over all expressions explains why it can be used to introduce new expressions and refer to expressions in other languages (#2). It clearly explains how grasp of the rule is sufficient to generate and understand a potential infinity of new expressions and to determine their referents on the basis of recognition of the quotation term itself, #4. Before we explain this further and consider objections, we briefly review the alternatives. The proper name theory, which has been attributed to Quine (1940, p. 26) and Tarski (1983, p. 159; though see note 4 above), is nowadays largely rejected, but it is instructive, and helps bring out what is distinctive about quotation. It holds that quotations are like ordinary proper names, such as 'Julius Caesar' or 'Mohandas Gandhi'. The proper name theory explains desideratum #1 because the contained term is treated as part of a name's spelling, like 'bill' in 'billabong'. However, it fails to accommodate desiderata #2-#4: it does not explain why QUOT(f) refers to f except as an accident of spelling, #3. For this reason, it cannot explain its function in introducing new expressions (#2), since to figure out that the name refers to a new expression it must be introduced independently. And for the same reason it cannot explain how understanding quotation puts one in a position to understand new quotation terms without having their referents introduced independently, #4. The description theory (Geach 1957, p. 82; Quine 1960, p. 143, p. 212) retains an element of the proper name theory, holding that there are primitive quotation names of either words or letters and that strings of words or letters in quotation marks are descriptions of their concatenation in the order in which they appear. For example, 'Caesar crossed the Rubicon' is interpreted either as the concatenation of 'Caesar' with 'crossed' ... or the concatenation of 'C' with 'a' with 'e' .... But since this retains the proper name theory at its core, it inherits its defects. Davidson's paratactic or demonstrative theory of quotation (Davidson 1979) treats quotation marks semantically as a description containing a demonstrative. Thus the quotation marks in a quotation are taken to be semantically equivalent to a description, 'The expression of which this is a token'. This handles desiderata #1 (since the expression is a sample to be demonstrated and not syntactically a part of the sentence) and #2 (since anything can be the referent of a demonstrative) but not #3 or #4b, since nothing constrains the referent to be the contained expression. Another difficulty is that it is hard to see how to extend this to using italics or underlining for the same purpose, since there is nothing separate from the token expression itself to serve as the sample to be demonstrated (Reimar 1996b, p. 135). A feature that makes for trouble on this account is the use of the free-wheeling demonstrative 'this', and some difficulties could be removed by constraining it to refer to the expression token in the quotation marks. But how do we do this? Do we say: the expression type of which a token is contained within these tokens of quotation marks? But now we have a demonstrative reference to token quotations marks and similar difficulties can arise. What is position inside quotation marks is not an argument position. It does not take referring terms. It cannot be bound. And the rule [GQ] does not so represent it. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 9 wanted is a rule that uses a description to determine a referent as in (DQ) (demonstrative quotation rule). (DQ) For any expression f, for any utterance act u, if u is an utterance of ['f'], u refers to the expression type of which the use of f in u is a token. (Recall we are using '[' and ']' as the left and right Quinean corner quotes-see note 2.) Once we have got it in this form, however, it seems clear that the same effect is achieved with a simplification, since by inspection the expression type of which the use of f is a token is just f: (Q) For any expression f, ['f'] refers to f. This just is the disquotational theory, however, applied to single quotation marks. From this perspective, the mistake Davidson made was to treat a rule for determining a referent of an expression as if it gave the meaning of the expression. This is a mistake equivalent to taking 'I' to mean 'the speaker who is now using \"I\"'. This is clearly a mistake since the proposition expressed by 'I am sitting' does not entail that there are any speakers, since it can be true in a possible world in which I am sitting but neither I nor anyone else is a speaker. The identity or use theory of quotation (Johnson 2011; Recanati 2000, 2001; Reimar 1996a; Saka 1998; Washington 1992) takes quotation marks (or other similar devices) to have a function similar to punctuation (see also Johnson this volume). On this view, their purpose is to indicate that the expression in the quotation context is being used to refer to itself. Thus, it is not the quotation term itself, but the contained expression that refers, and the function of the quotation marks is, as it were, to disambiguate the use of the expression. The quotation marks do not themselves refer, describe, or demonstrate, and neither does the quotation term. The main motivation for the identity or use theory, as opposed to the disquotational theory, is that it treats the use of quotation marks as continuous with verbal reference to expressions made by using them as in (6), (6) Call me Ishmael where the speaker is understood to be referring to the name 'Ishmael' rather than (merely) using it. The identity or use theory treats the speaker as using 'Ishmael' to refer to itself. A secondary consideration is that it allows quotation to be used to refer to tokens as well as types, and types of various sorts, depending on the speaker's intentions. As we will note, the disquotational view can accommodate this. The disquotational and identity/use theories are quite similar. There is a sense in which the disquotation theory might be said to treat quotation marks as punctuation-they are not given semantic significance independently of use around an expression. The difference lies in what the PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 10 rule for quotation marks treats as the referring term. For the identity/use theory the rule goes as in (QI) (quotation rule for the identity theory): (QI) For any expression f, when f appears in an expression of the form ['f'], f refers to f.11 This is, on the face of it, a less straightforward way to understand the rule for quotation, and seems gratuitous from the standpoint of semantics, since there is no need to treat a substring of the string the rule applies to as the genuine referring term. Moreover, this is clearly not something that is transparent to users of quotation terms, and it is difficult to see what about our use of quotation terms would motivate taking only the contained string to be the referring term. The motivation to preserve continuity with examples like 'Call me Ishmael' (even granting in this sentence 'Ishmael' is used to refer to itself rather than being the deferred ostension of a tacit demonstrative) is not adequate. First, historically, quotation is a device that arose specifically in the context of written language (see note 5). There is no reason to take it to be a device continuous with or derivative from any device in spoken language. Second, in the development of written languages, from the design standpoint it makes sense to introduce a syntactic device that functions as characterized by (GQ). In contrast, from the design standpoint, (QI) seems gratuitous and unmotivated. Moreover, we will argue that (GQ) proves to be particularly fruitful in understanding how quotational devices extend beyond pure quotation. In sum, grasp of the rule (GQ) (GQ) For any expression f, QUOT(f) refers to f. suffices for anyone who understands it to understand any sentence in which a quotation name appears (used for pure quotation). Nothing more needs to be added. But if you do not understand this much, you do not understand quotation. This suffices to explain the connection between the contained expression and the term's referent. It explains how we get from recognition of the term itself to its referent. It explains how quotation generates an infinite number of expressions and puts one in a position to understand them (when they are presented-see below). It explains how it can be used to introduce new symbols and refer to expressions in other languages. Importantly, it captures the sense in which quotation is, in Quine's terms, like a hieroglyph, but without the need to treat it as literally picturing itself. 11 The use theory also seems to give the wrong result for certain sentences. For example, if the use theory is correct, we cannot truly say in English that 'nurphalisturbia' is not a word that has a use in English, because that would ipso facto illustrate a use of the word in English. Yet, it seems we can say that truly. The disquotational theory avoids this result. It is also, perhaps, slightly odd to think that every expression (of Chinese, or Russian, or Arabic, or yet unimagined languages) is a name of itself in English, which is a consequence of the theory. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 11 What about the case of using italics (or underlining/overlining) to indicate that one is referring to the italicized (or underlined/overlined) word? (GQ) applies to this as well. Underlining and overlining are devices like quotation marks in the sense that they involve a symbol external to the expression being referred to. But in the case of italicizing a word, the italicized word is a determinate of the type that the italicized expression refers to. In this case, the word, though italicized, is used to refer to a type of which it is a token, though not to the more determinate type the italicized word represents. Sometimes the disquotational theory is said to treat quotation marks as a functor that takes an expression as an argument and returns the expression as a value. This is a mistake. The rule (GQ) tells you what the quotation term refers to on the basis of how it is constructed. It carries no more commitments than that. To treat it as assigning a function to quotation marks is to assimilate it to expressions that have a different semantic role. The position of 'f' in ['f'] is not an argument position at all because it does not treat the expression that appears there as a referring term. (GQ) gives a minimalist but sufficient account of the function of pure quotation. No assimilation to other devices is needed: it is what it is and not another thing. Most of the mistakes in the theory of quotation derive from trying to understand quotation in terms of other devices of reference. A straightforward and interesting consequence of (GQ) is that a language that contains a quotation device that obeys (GQ) does not have a recursively definable syntax because it contains a nondenumerably infinite number of semantically primitive expressions. 12 Call the basic vocabulary of a language minus quotation terms (if any) its basic lexicon. The basic lexicon of any natural language is finite.13 Each item in the basic lexicon must be learned independently of the others. The rest of the language, excluding again quotation names, can be understood on the basis of understanding the basic lexicon and rules for their combination. (GQ) introduces an additional class of expressions that refer to expressions. It does not generate them from the basic lexicon together with a set of rules for combining expressions.14 Instead, it quantifies over all expressions, including expressions that are not in the language, to produce expressions in the language which are about those expressions. (This is another way to see why quotation cannot be assimilated to functional expressions, which can take as argument terms only terms that refer in 12 It is also said to be a counterexample to compositionality because while putting quotation marks around an expression to form a term referring to it is a syntactic rule, its \"semantic value\" isn't composed from the semantic values of its constituents. Some take this to be a reason to reject the disquotational account, but since it is perfectly intelligible it is rather this particular form of compositionality, or its application to quotation, that should be rejected. See Pagin and Westerstahl (2010) for discussion. 13 What about numerals? Aren't there an infinite number of them - even non-denumerably many, since there is no reason in principle not to allow full decimal representations of real numbers? But the basic numerals are '0' through '9', and the referents of complex numerals and decimal expressions are given in relation to the primitive numerals. 14 As remarked in note 7, the artificial language Lojban is an exception, for it restricts quotation to expressions otherwise in the language. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 12 the language.) Since the class of expressions is not recursively enumerable, the class of quotation names is not recursively enumerable either. In addition, nothing one grasps in grasping the basic lexicon and the rule for quotation puts one in a position to understand every expression in the language, specifically the class of quotation names. It might be thought that this runs afoul of Davidson's learnability argument, the upshot of which was supposed to be that grasp of a finite vocabulary of primitive items had to suffice for understanding any potential utterance in a natural language on pain of making it unlearnable for finite beings like us (Davidson 2001, pp. 8-9). Quotation names turn out to show a limitation in the argument. For, although we are not in advance in a position to understand every expression in the language, specifically all of the quotation terms, given the way quotation works, as soon as we are presented with a quotation term, we can use the rule to determine what it refers to, for in recognizing the quotation term itself, we are in a position then to see what it refers to. It has been objected that because the disquotational theory quantifies over expressions, it may undergenerate quotation terms (Lepore 1999). The thought is that any symbol can appear in quotation marks, whether or not this symbol is an expression in any actual spoken language, or even in any possible language. As noted above, however, we do not distinguish between symbols and expressions. In addition, any symbol can be used in some language, even if it is not used in any actual language. Apart from this, the objection is self-defeating because in offering it the objector must use a term to capture the class of things that he thinks the quotation device can be applied to which is larger than the class of expressions. This supplies the proponent of the disquotational theory with a term to use in place of 'expression' that will capture the right category of items (supposing the objector is correct). Finally, one of the themes of the identity/use theory of quotation is that quotation terms can be used to refer to different sorts of things, not just expression types. If we think about how the identity/use theorist has to characterize his own rule to accommodate this, however, we can see that whatever he can say can be adopted by the disquotational theory. There are two basic ways to do it. First, one can argue that quotation marks are ambiguous, and the different uses signal different sorts of things as the referents. Disambiguating would amount to supplying for each different use a different target. For example, we might introduce a use of quotation marks to refer to tokens of types that appear in the quotation marks. Suppose that we use asterisks as quotation marks that are used to refer to the token of the expression that appears between them. We can give the following clause: (Q*) For any expression f, for any speaker u, time t, [*f*] as used by u at t refers to the token of f produced by u at t in producing a token of [*f*] For expression types individuated according to different standards, we can replace the restriction on f in the first quantifier with a term that expresses the appropriate notion. Second, one could treat quotation marks as context sensitive, with the kind of thing referred to being determined PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 13 relative to the speaker's intention. We still need to have in mind a class of items over which we can quantify and in relation to which we can locate other types. So we still need to use 'expression' in some suitable sense in the restriction on our quantifier. But this is fine as long as whatever else the speaker has in mind can be located in relation to it. So, for example, we can give the rule (QCS) (quotation as context sensitive): (QCS) For any expression f, for any speaker u, time t, QUOT(f) as used by u at t refers to the type or token that bears the relation intended by u at t to the token of f produced by u at t. Having said this, we add that we think pure quotation is conventionally used to refer to expression types, and we assume this in the following.15 It is sometime said that the disquotational theory, while suitable for pure quotation, can't be the correct theory of quotation because it cannot handle cases beyond (1) and possibly simple cases of direct quotation as in (2a). In our view, this desideratum is confused. Quotation, as we said in the introduction, is polysemous. It has a variety of related uses. The conceptual core of quotation, however, is captured in the disquotation rule, (GQ), for pure quotation. To try to give one rule for all the forms of quotation, as opposed to explaining them in relation to the core use, would be like trying to give a single definition for 'walk' that accommodated all the following uses: 'I went for a walk', 'I walked the dog', 'We'll have to walk the wardrobe to the bedroom rather than carry it', 'She walks the ramparts', 'The workers threatened to walk'. Only confusion can result. In the following, we explain the uses found in (2)-(4) as exploiting the device of pure quotation for further purposes. 3 Quotation in which Contained Expressions Are Intended to Be Understood In this section we discuss the varieties of quotation found in examples (2)-(3). We begin with the idea that in using a quotation term, it can be crucial to its function that it contains a meaningful expression which is both understood and understood to be referred to, though the meanings of the quoted expressions do not contribute to fixing the truth conditions of the sentence containing the quotation term. 3.1 Quasi-use-mention We begin with (2), repeated here, (2) \"psychology\" literally means \"the study of the soul.\"16 15 Can't one write on the black board: 'This' is written in chalk. Well, we get the idea, of course, but it helps that 'this' is the word written! Consider: 'Boston' is written in chalk. Puzzling! We feel like saying: sometimes yes, sometimes no. But then this is about the word being written in chalk (a chalk token produced) on this or that occasion. 16 American printer's conventions place commas and periods that are part of the containing sentence inside quotation marks rather than outside. We ignore this in the accounts we develop. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 14 It will be useful in considering the function of quotation in (2) to first consider the use of the following sentences: (7) 'Schnee ist Weiss' in German means that snow is white (8) 'Schnee' in German means the same as 'neige' in French. (9) 'Schnee' in German means snow (10) 'Schnee' in German means snow In (7) the subject term is simply used to refer to a German sentence, and it is not presupposed that we know its meaning because the point of (7) is to explain it. But how does (7) do this? The traditional answer is that the complement, 'that snow is white', refers to the proposition that the German sentence expresses, and by grasping that proposition and associating it with the German sentence, we come to know what it means. However, how do we grasp the proposition? Merely referring to the proposition isn't sufficient, for if we had named the proposition that snow is white 'Betty' and substituted that for the complement, when we told someone what 'Schnee ist Weiss' meant, she would be none the wiser. A Fregean might say that there is a mode of presentation attached to 'that snow is white' that suffices for one to grasp what it refers to, but this is mysterious-what mode of presentation ipso facto suffices for entertaining its object if it is a proposition? And how would this explain the importance of the appearance of the sentence itself in the complement rather than a name? There is a simpler answer to the question how (7) informs us of what the 'Schnee ist Weiss' means in German, namely, that (i) it is a condition on the truth of (7) that the sentence in the complement translate 'Schnee ist Weiss' and (ii) we understand that sentence. Once we see this, we can also see that what the complement refers to, if anything, is irrelevant to the work that the sentence does for us. It might as well be the sentence itself rather than a proposition, for all the use that the proposition is to us (Ludwig 2014). So here we have a device for conveying the meaning of a sentence that involves using a sentence in our language, where it is crucial for the work that is to be done that our interlocutor understand the sentence, even though the extensional properties of the sentence do not contribute in any way to determining the truth conditions of the containing sentence. Now consider in contrast (8), where we take the quotation terms to be pure quotation. In this case, it is clear that one could understand the sentence without understanding either of the quoted expressions and so remain in the dark about the meaning of either term. This stands in contrast to (9) and (10) which we use to explain what a term in German means to someone who speaks English. The difference is simply that we presuppose that our audience understands the A simple syntactic rewrite of the sentences yields the form that serves as input to the rules given in the following. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 15 complement expressions (and so assume that the audience doesn't fully understand the sentence without doing so) and that the sentences are true only if the term appearing to the right of the verb means the same as the term mentioned on the left. In (8) we relativize the meaning relation to both German and French. In (9) and (10) we relativize only the term mentioned on the left because in using the terms on the right in English we fix their interpretations. In (9) we use italics to indicate that the expression to the right of 'means' is being used to give the meaning of the expression on the left, that is, that it is both to be understood and to be understood as the same in meaning as the expression on the left. In (10) the same information is carried simply by context. With this in mind, when we consider (2), we can see that while pure quotation is being used on the left, the expression quoted on the right is intended to be understood, for this is a sentence we use to convey the meaning of one expression by using another. This use of quotation involves reference to the contained expression, and that reference is secured by (GQ), but there is another dimension to the use which, like the function of the complement in (7), does not come out in thinking about the contribution of the expression to the truth conditions of the sentence. We call this a quasi-use of the expression, by which we mean that it is essential to its function in the context that it be understood as used by the speaker (this, e.g., secures disambiguation and fixes the contributions to meaning by context sensitive terms), but the extensional properties of the expression contained do not contribute to fixing the truth conditions of the sentence. We will call quotation of the sort illustrated on the right side of 'means' in (2) quasi-use quotation. 3.2 Direct Discourse With this in hand we turn to the use of quotation with direct discourse. A common view about direct discourse is that the function of a sentence such as (3a) (3) (a) He said, \"Get serious, boy.\" is to give a literal rendering of the words spoken by someone on a particular occasion. However, the practice is more complicated than this. In particular, we will distinguish between strict and non-strict direct discourse. In strict direct discourse, the sentence of direct discourse is true iff its subject bears the relation expressed by the verb to the sentence in quotation marks (excluding punctuation introduced solely as a result of printer's conventions). The strict use is illustrated in (3b-d). (3) (b) She said, \"Gorse is common in Scotland\"; she did not say, \"Furze is common in Scotland.\" (c) Caesar literally said, \"Veni, Vidi, Vici,\" not \"I came, I saw, I conquered.\" (d) He said, 'All mimsy were the borogroves,\" but didn't have anything in mind by it. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 16 Here what is important are the words themselves rather than any translation of them. 'Gorse' and 'Furze' mean the same, but switching 'Gorse' and 'Furze' in (3b) may change a truth into a falsehood. Similarly, in (3c), 'I came, I saw, I conquered' is a translation of 'Veni, Vidi, Vici', but a contrast is being drawn. In (3d) clearly the meaning of the words can't be at issue because it is a nonsense sentence. For strict direct discourse, we can give the truth conditions as in (DQS) (direct quotation strict), where 'ref(a, u, t)' expresses a reference function from a name, speaker and time to a referent of the name as used by the speaker at that time, that is, For any x, u, t, ref(a, u, t) = x iff a as used by u at t refers to x, and we relativize the truth predicate to the speaker and time as well. (DQS) For any speaker u, time t, expression φ, name a, [a said, \"φ\"] is true(u, t) iff there is a time t' < t such that ref(a, u, t) says φ at t' But not all uses are strict. First, very often understanding the expression quoted is essential to the function of the sentence, as in dialogue in a novel. This is the case for (3a). Thus, it must be construed as involving a quasi-use of the contained expressions. This does not show up in the specification of the truth conditions, but is an aspect of the conventions associated with the use of direct discourse in certain uses. Ideally these would be marked with a special sort of quotation mark, but in practice context disambiguates. Second, in direct discourse we also often use words in our language to report what someone said in another language as in (3e). (3) (e) Then Jesus said to them, \"Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.\" In this case, we use a translation of the words of Jesus (as reported in Mark) into our language, but they are not the words that Jesus used. And despite the contrast with (3c) above, there is nothing problematic about this use. Thus, in the non-strict use of direct quotation, we intend a quasi-use and that the subject have uttered the sentence referred to or a sentence that translates it. The first of these requirements, as mentioned, does not show up in the truth conditions. The second is accommodated in (DQNS) (direct quotation non-strict), in which introduce the standard event analysis of action sentences which treats the action verb as introducing an existential event quantifier (Ludwig 2010). For this purpose, we use the following abbreviation: says(e, ref(a, u, t), t', s) PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 17 = ref(a, u, t) is an agent of e at t' and e is an utterance and e is an instance of s. We also make explicit relativization of the semantic predicates to languages. We introduce this additional complexity because we need to relativize the translation of φ to the language the subject used in his utterance of s, and there may be no unique language he speaks in which s is a sentence. The truth conditions are then given in (DQNS). (DQNS) For any speaker u, time t, expression φ, name a, [a said, \"φ\"] is true(u, t, English) iff there is an event e, a time t' < t, and a sentence s, such that (i) says(e, ref(a, u, t), t', s) and (ii) φ in English translates s in the language of ref(\u0000, u, t) at t' in e.17 (DQNS) accommodates the case in which the subject uses the same sentence as the speaker, since every sentence is a translation of itself. There is a further complication presented by the practice of using punctuation and ellipses in direct quotation (of oral speech) as in (3f). (3) (f) \"Good morning! it was kind of you to push the chair up that hill ... I hope it wasn't heavy for you,\" said Connie, looking back at the keeper outside the door. The exclamation mark indicates something about the mode of delivery. While in pure quotation ['f!'] refers to an expression that has an exclamation mark at the end, in direct quotation, reporting oral speech, the exclamation mark indicates a non-symbolic feature of the utterance act type. But this does not need special treatment because the type picked out by ['f!'] has one realization in written language and another in spoken language. The same extends to question marks, italics, boldface, caps, and other devices such as repeating a letter to indicate dragging out a syllable, as in, 'That was soooo boring'. These indicate aspects of the utterance type that extend beyond what words were used to include how they were used. Ellipsis comes in two varieties.18 (I) It can be used to indicate that words in the original are omitted. This is illustrated in (3g). 17 It might be objected that 'x said ...' doesn't contain a reference to English in its analysis. Then replace 'English' with 'the language of u at t in uttering [a said, \"φ\"]'. 18 Of course, an ellipsis mark may be a part of an expression referred to in quotation marks. One can say, for example, when he wrote, \"Well ... I wouldn't go so far as to say it is entirely worthless!\", he used the ellipsis '...' to convey a hesitation of his thought in writing what he did. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 18 (g) Davidson said, \"Quotation is a device used to refer to typographical ... shapes by exhibiting samples.\" We call this omission ellipsis. Omission ellipsis can be accommodated by conditionalizing on whether or not this sort of ellipsis occurs in a quotation in direct discourse and requiring that the subject (Davidson in the case of (1g)) have uttered a sentence or a translation of a sentence obtained from the sentence with the ellipsis by inclusion of some additional material in the position of the ellipsis. We will not write out the clauses. (II) But in (3f) that is not their function. The ellipsis indicates neither that something is omitted nor that the subject uttered or wrote anything that corresponds to the ellipsis '...', but just that there was a temporal gap (a hesitation) between utterance corresponding to the material before the ellipsis in the quotation and the material after it, though it is intended as a single speech act. For the case of ellipsis of the sort illustrated in (3f), one might initially think that we could treat x said \"---- ... ----\" as roughly equivalent to x said \"----\" followed by a pause and then \"----\" This could be incorporated straightforwardly into a truth conditional account. But an ellipsis can occur anywhere, including multiple times in a single sentence such as: He said, \"I think ... you really don't want to ... tease the sasquatch.\" To report this as his saying \"I think\" followed by a pause, then \"you really don't want to\" followed by a pause, then \"tease the sasquatch,\" is compatible with his not having said, \"I think you really don't want to tease the sasquatch.\" It is more straightforward to treat ellipsis in this use-like an exclamation mark, or italics, or a question mark-as indicating something about the utterance type beyond what words in what order are included in it, namely, that it includes somewhat greater than usual temporal gaps between portions of what is uttered. Importantly, for all these ways of indicating something about the utterance type, we have to take translation, as it figures in (DQNS), to require preservation of devices indicating something about the type of utterance beyond its content. Dialogue in fiction or in reports where the context determines who is speaking (typically called free direct speech) we treat as translatable into (that is, shorthand for) direct discourse. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 19 3.3 Direct Attitude Attributions A striking use of quotation is in direct attributions of thought. These may also include ellipses and punctuation like exclamation marks and question marks inside quotation marks. In these cases, we treat the sentences as if they expressed a thought someone is having or had or will have. We will treat the sentences understood relative to the thinker and time of thought as expressing the contents of occurrent thoughts of the thinker (the subject of the sentence). As in (3h), the sentence that is used to capture the content of a thought may be split between two quotations. First we join the quotations into one, as in (3h.i). (3h) (i) Alice thought, \"And what is the use of a book without pictures or conversation?\" This can be thought of as a purely syntactic operation performed before interpretation. Then we give the truth conditions for 'a thought, \"φ\"' in (DQT) (direct quotation thought). (DQT) For any speaker u, time t, expression φ, [a thought, \"φ\"] is true(u, t) iff there is a time t' < t, and a state s, such that (i) thinks(s, ref(a), t') and (ii) @(s, φ, ref(a), t')) The variable 's' takes states as values. The relational predicate '@(s, φ, x, t)' expresses a samenessof-content relation between f (in English) interpreted relative to x at t (that is, with x and t as values for the contextual parameters), on the one hand, and x's thought s, on the other. We wish this to be interpreted broadly so that it subsumes both sameness of propositional content where appropriate but also inner exclamations, thanks, pauses, and so on, since we wish to accommodate examples such as (11) and (12). (11) \"Thank goodness!\" he thought to himself. (12) \"Well done,\" he thought as he smiled. In this connection, the use of the exclamation point can be taken to reflect an aspect of the state associated with what we might call the reception of its content-it marks the thought as emphatic, as we might put it. A question mark indicates that the psychological mode is \"interrogative\"- that is, '\"Which one is it?\" he thought' means the same as '\"Which one is it?\" he wondered'. An ellipsis indicates a pause (or hesitation) in a thought. One way of thinking about it is to think of the relation introduced as aiming to capture something about the way that the thinker him or herself would express the thought at the time in her language-that if she verbally expressed the thought at the time of thinking it, in a play-by-play report, as it were, what she said could be reported in PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 20 direct discourse using the sentence used to characterize it. This would mean that such attributions would be limited to linguistic beings, but on reflection this seems plausible, because it is quite difficult to make sense of attributing a thought to a nonlinguistic animal using (3h) or (11) or (12), except under the pretense that it speaks a language or thinks in a language. An alternative would be to think of these attributions as requiring that the subject (thinker) explicitly be thinking in words, in the way that we sometimes have a particular sentence in mind or a particular sentence occurs to us which we do not utter ('What a nincompoop!'). However, since we may also want to attribute something like (14) to someone without supposing that he has in mind, in this way, the words for expressing the thought, but merely that if he did express it, using those words to report what he said would be apt, this cannot cover all cases. But there may be a use which aims precisely to get at having a particular \"thought sentence\" in mind. To capture this, we can substitute for 'thinks' a relation that expresses being in a state of verbally thinking a thought at a time, and change the equivalence relation to require the state to be not just like in content but to be like in respect of involving a thought sentence that is the same as (on the strict reading) or a translation of (on the non-strict reading) the sentence in quotation marks. One difference between direct discourse and direct attribution of thoughts is worth drawing attention to. In direct discourse, we relate a sentence φ used by the person uttering it to a sentence s uttered by its subject, requiring that the one be the same as or translation the other, where this just requires a translation manual, not that the sentences be interpreted relative to context (they may contain nonsense terms even). In direct thought attributions we interpret the complement sentence relative to the thinker and time of the thought because we are interested in sameness of propositional content between a sentence and a state. This ensures that indexical elements like the 'I', in the complement of (3i), and demonstratives and tense are correctly interpreted for the purpose of conveying the content and mode of the thought. (3) (i) \"If I had a child!\" she thought to herself; \"if I had him inside me as a child!\" This can be extended to inner dialogues in fiction and reporting where the context determines who the thinker is (that is, free direct thought attributions) by treating them as translatable into (shorthand for) direct attributions. 4 Quotation in Exposition The examples in (4) involve exposition in which an author is expressing something in his own voice, but in part using the words of another, as in (4a-b), or a translation of the words of another, as in (4c). (4) (a) In this chapter, Mill attempts to delineate when the authority of society can rightly limit individuality and the \"sovereignty of the individual over himself.\" PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 21 (b) Berkeley's objective in the New Theory of Vision was \"to shew the manner wherein we perceive by sight the distance, magnitude, and situation of objects. Also to consider the difference there is betwixt the ideas of sight and touch, and whether there be any idea common to both senses\" (NTV §1). (c) They substituted, as Kant has pointed out, \"a physiology of the human understanding\" for the Critical investigation of the claims of reason, and anthropology for ethics.19 We wish first to say that the speaker (of any of (4a-c)) asserts what is expressed by the sentence stripped of a first layer of quotation marks. Then we wish to say that the words in quotation marks in the sentence or a translation of them were used by another, whom we will call 'the subject', as indicated in the sentence, or by a citation, or the context. We will not require that the subject have uttered a sentence that expresses the same thing as what the speaker utters, however. For one may say, in one's own voice, e.g., I reject, in distinction from Kant, the mere \"empirical reality of time\" and accept its \"absolute and transcendental reality.\" In addition, one may use words or phrases in a single sentence drawn from different sentences and even different texts. We will call this variety of quotation 'scholarly quotation' and the quotation marks in this use 'scholar quotes'. A question arises about whether we should put into the truth conditions of sentences like (4a-c) the implication that the subject (of the clause) used the words in quotation marks, or treat it as a conventional implicature, the truth conditions being given by the sentence stripped of one layer of quotation marks. In the latter case, it is a requirement for felicitous utterance, but not for truth, that the subject mentioned used those words or a translation of them. We will just represent truth conditions for sentences containing scholarly quotation as in (SQ). For this purpose, we introduce two operators for removing and putting quotations on expressions, 'UNQ' and 'QUO'. (We will find these useful in the next section on mixed quotation in indirect discourse as well.) UNQ(φ) is the result of removing one \"layer\" of double-quotation marks from φ together with any square brackets surrounding material inside an outermost layer of quotation marks. QUO(g) is the result of adding double quotation-marks at both ends of the expression g. Thus UNQ('\"religious\" leaders are \"creatures of exalted emotional sensibility\"') = 'religious leaders are individuals of exalted emotional sensibility'. QUO('creatures of exalted emotional sensibility') = '\"creatures of exalted emotional sensibility\"'. If there are no double 19 We do not assimilate this to indirect discourse. The parenthetical 'as Kant pointed out' is a comment on what the writer is saying, which is given by the sentence sans phrase. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 22 quotation marks in φ, then UNQ(φ) = φ. To cut a corner, let SUB(φ, u, t, g) = the person or text to which the quoted words g in φ are referred relative to u and t.20 (SQ) For any speaker u, time t, atomic sentence φ that contains scholar quotes, φ is true(u, t, English) iff (i) UNQ(φ) is true(u, t, English) and (ii) for all g such that QUO(g) occurs in φ, there is a g' in a language of SUB(φ, u, t, g) that is a translation of g in English and is used by (or in) SUB(φ, u, t, g). We treat 'is used by' as tenseless, that is, as equivalent to 'has been, is, or will be used at some time or other by'.21 5 Mixed Indirect Discourse and Attitude Attribution 5.1 Mixed Indirect Discourse22 We begin with a simple case of mixed indirect discourse and quotation (dubbed mixed quotation by Cappelen and Lepore (1997). (5a) Macomber said that he \"bolted like a rabbit.\" Intuitively, (5a) says that (i) Macomber said that he bolted like a rabbit and (ii) he used \"bolted like a rabbit\" (or perhaps something that translates that) in saying that of himself (given that the report is of his narration of what he did). We take this to be a semantic phenomenon. We learn how to interpret the appearance of quotation marks in complements of indirect discourse sentences in much the same way we learn how to interpret other constructions, and what we learn can be expressed with a rule. The goal of this section is to state the rule. However, we cannot always treat the quoted expression as something the subject is saying of himself (it may make no reference to the subject at all). So the gloss on (5a) cannot stand in as 20 There is no simple or uniform syntactic method of identifying the person to whom or text to which the quoted words are referred. Sometimes it is the subject of the sentence as in (4a-b). Sometimes an adverbial clause provides the information, as in (4c). Sometimes a citation to a text is given at the end of a sentence. Sometimes it is given in a footnote. Sometimes it is left entirely to the context. 21 In section 5, we give a treatment for authorial brackets used in mixed quotation (as in [5c]). The treatment there can be adapted to scholarly quotation. If \"monstrous\" operators are to be tolerated, the treatment in section 6 could be adapted for scholarly quotation. It should be clear how the extensions go from the treatment below. 22 Of course, scare quotes may be used in the complements of verbs of indirect discourse, but that has a quite different point relating to the attitude of the speaker to words appearing in the complement rather than to words that the subject used. See note 5. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 23 a general treatment. In addition, (5b) shows that there may be multiple instances of quoted material in the complement clause. (5b) Alice said that she had \"heard nonsense\" compared with which that would be \"as sensible as a dictionary.\" In giving an account of how the subject of the sentence expressed what is attributed to her, we must keep track of the grammatical role of the various quoted expressions in the complement. In fact, given that the same word can be quoted multiple times, in different roles, it is clear that merely saying that the word was used in the subject's saying what she did will not convey what is intended. (5c) illustrates how an expression may be substituted in the quoted expression (here in brackets) so that the referent interpreted relative to the speaker corresponds to the referent of the word used by the subject of the attribution, since in indirect discourse the complement sentence is, except for the tense, which is governed by the event time for the main verb, interpreted relative to the speaker's context (though see section 6). (5c) She said that it had been many years since \"such trifles had broke across the web of [her] solitude.\" (5d) illustrates a case in which the subject of the attribution did not use the words in quotation marks at all. (5d) Rochefoucauld said that jealousy \"ends as soon as we pass from suspicion to certainty.\" In this case, the function of the quoted expression is to indicate that these words are, or are a translation of, the words that the subject used. There are, however, cases in which it looks like a stricter standard is called for, and so in the case of indirect discourse, as for direct discourse, we will distinguish between a strict and a non-strict reading. We will begin with the non-strict reading, and return below to examples that suggest that a stricter reading is also sometimes intended. In Ludwig and Ray (1998), we offered a general account of the multiple appearances of quotation in indirect discourse against the background of a sententialist account of indirect discourse and attitude sentences, but we did not extend it to interpolations as in (5c) or to using translations of expressions used by the subject as in (5d). We refine that account here (and fix a few things). We make use of the two operators introduced in the previous section for removing and putting quotations on expressions, 'UNQ' and 'QUO'. A sententialist account contrasts with a propositionalist account of indirect discourse (and attitude attributions). On the sententialist account, the complement clause in a report of indirect discourse refers to the contained sentence and characterizes what the subject said in terms of a content equivalence relation. On the propositionalist account, it refers to the proposition expressed PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 24 by the complement, which is said to be the same as that expressed by something the subject said. While we prefer the more minimalist sententialist account, after we present the refinement and extension of our earlier account, we will sketch how to extend the same ideas to a propositional account, which requires only minor modifications. On the sententialist account given in Ludwig and Ray (1998), we treated 'x said that φ' as relating x to the sentence φ understood relative to the speaker of the sentence and time of utterance. In the following, we use the event analysis of action verbs (as we did for direct discourse) in order to secure that the two clauses are linked in the right way. For this purpose we use saying(e, t', x, UNQ(φ), u, t) to abbreviate e is a saying by x at t' which samesays UNQ(φ) understood relative to u at t where e is an event, x is the agent of e, t' is the time of at which x is the agent e, t is the time of utterance, u is the speaker, and 'samesays' is a possibly context-sensitive equivalence relation that relates utterances and sentences.23 For present purposes it is not necessary to settle the details of how to interpret the samesaying relation, and, in particular, whether and how it differs from a generalization of the synonymy relation. We will develop the account in two stages. In the first stage we ignore pronouns, and indexicals24 in the complement sentence that need reinterpretation across contexts, in order to illustrate how to accommodate multiple appearances of quoted material in the complement. In the second stage, we will fix the problem this leaves us with pronouns and indexicals. This will provide a template for other verbs of indirect discourse. Stage 1. Ignoring pronouns, etc., in the complement, using the notation just introduced, (MID) (mixed indirect) provides an account of the truth conditions of indirect discourse using the verb 'to say' whether involving mixed quotation or not. (MID) For all speakers u, times t, sentences \u0000, names a, [a said that \u0000] is true(u, t) iff there is an e, and a time t' < t, such that (a) saying(e, t', ref(a, u, t), UNQ(\u0000), u, t) and (b) If UNQ(\u0000) 1 \u0000, then 23 Davidson used 'samesaying' to relate speakers (1968, pp. 140-141) in an informal rendering of his account of indirect discourse. Lepore and Loewer appropriated it for use as relating utterances in a defense of Davidson's paratactic account (1989, 343), and it has been pressed into service (in a generalization) as the equivalence relation invoked by 'says' between the subject's utterance and whatever the complement clause refers to in indirect discourse ever since. 24 Under 'indexicals' we include not just what Kaplan called pure indexicals (like 'I', 'now', 'today', etc., whose referents are determined fully relative to a specification of contextual parameters) but also (what he called true) demonstratives (like 'this', 'that', 'then', 'there', and demonstrative uses of pronouns). PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 25 (i) there is a sentence q such that e is an utterance of q and q in the language of ref(\u0000, u, t) at t' in e, relative to ref(a, u, t) at t', is a translation of UNQ(\u0000) understood relative to u at t,25 and (ii) for all expressions g, and formulas y, if \u0000 = the result of replacing 'x' in y with QUO(g), then (iii) a translation of g into the language of q as used by ref(a, u, t) has the same grammatical role in q as QUO(g) has in \u0000. Clause (a) ensures that the subject says what the sentence in the complement says minus the first layer of quotation marks. Clause (b) ensures that wherever a term appears in quotation marks in the complement, there is a translation of it that was used in the same role in a sentence the subject used to express what he did. Stage 2. Pronouns and indexicals used in the complement clause, as in (13) and (14), (13) Betty said that she was \"pixelated\" (14) Betty said that I was \"pixelated\" make for some complication because in giving the truth conditions for (13) we want to say that Betty uttered, not a translation of 'she was pixelated', but rather of 'I am pixelated', using 'pixelated'. Similarly, for (14), we want to say that she uttered not a translation of 'I was pixelated' but of a sentence such as 'You are pixelated' using 'pixelated'. In the case of a pronoun crossindexed with the subject, we want to shift specifically to a sentence in which the first-person pronoun is used. This can be incorporated into (MID) by introducing in the place of 'translation of UNQ(\u0000)' a defined term, 'index-shifted translation of \u0000'. (Def) \u0000' understood relative to x at t' is an index-shifted translation of \u0000 understood relative to u at t iff \u0000' is a mere indexical-variant of a translation of UNQ(\u0000) such that (i) for every occurrence of an indexical \u0000 in \u0000 there is in the same grammatical role in \u0000' an occurrence of an indexical (or directly referring term) \u0000 such that \u0000 understood relative to u' at t' refers to the same thing as \u0000 understood relative to u at t 25 We let 'understood relative to u at t' do double duty, fixing both interpretation of the sentence and contextual parameters. See the discussion below of the use of words in complements that aren't strictly in English. Ultimately, in a truth-theoretic semantics, we would wish to introduce the speech act the speaker performs as another contextual parameter, in which case we could add a further relativization to the use of the sentence in the speech act itself. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 26 (ii) and if \u0000\u0000is co-indexed with the subject position, then \u0000 is the first-person pronoun agreeing in number with \u0000\u0000 To say that \u0000' is a mere indexical-variant of a translation of UNQ(\u0000) is just to say that but for possibly these indexical shifts, \u0000' does not differ from a translation of UNQ(\u0000). By way of example, suppose when A greets you this morning, A says, \"You were late for a very important date yesterday\". Then 'I am late for a very important date today' understood relative to you and yesterday is an index-shifted translation relative to A today. Together with the definition of 'UNQ(x)' this handles (5c). For a propositionalist account of the function of the complement, we can replace (a) with (a¢). (a¢) saying(e, a, ref([that UNQ(φ)], u, t)) ... We relativize the reference of [that UNQ(φ)] to speaker and time because the proposition it designates is determined in general relative to the interpretation of UNQ(φ) relative to the context of utterance. The approach above extends naturally to cases involving quantification into the complement clause, as in There is something such that Galileo said that it moves. On a sententialist account, we want to say that this is true just in case an assertion of Galileo's samesays a completion of the sentence form 'x moves', i.e., a sentence in which 'x' is replaced by a singular referring term.26 However, we must provide a way of generalizing this requirement that allows for the possibility that there is no completion in English of the sentence form 'x moves' that samesays with any sentence that Galileo uttered. This can be done by providing a satisfaction clause for open sentences along the lines of (MIDQ) (mixed indirect quantification). (MIDQ) For all sequences f, all speakers u, times t, formulas \u0000x, names a, [a said that \u0000x] is satisfied by f relative to u and t iff ... The remainder of this condition would be just as in (MID), but in place of '\u0000' we will put '\u0000*' which latter would be shorthand for the result of replacing 'x' in \u0000 with a constant \u0000 in a language that extends the language of \u0000 only by the addition of \u0000, and in which \u0000 refers to f('x'). 26 We give an account for the sententialist view of the referent of the complement. For the propositionalist, it is just a matter of quantifying into a complex term that refers to a proposition, and so relativizing the referent of the complement to the object assigned to the variable (relativized to speaker and time). PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 27 Clearly, the approach could be generalized to formulas with any number of free variables. It should be noted that attitude attributions, with the exception of present-tense attributions, involve quantification into temporal argument positions in the complement, and so are to be treated in accordance with the account of quantification given here. As Cappelen and Lepore have noted (1997), in reporting what people say, we can put words they use in quotation marks in the complement of indirect discourse even though they misuse or misspell them or just use expressions that are not words in the language we are speaking at all, as in (15). (15) Nicola said that his father is a \"philtosopher\"27 This is a case in which a stricter standard for what sentence the subject uttered is called for, for the intention is to indicate that Nicola used 'philtosopher', not just any word that means the same as the speaker's use of it, to express being a philosopher (or whatever she expresses by it). For the strict reading, we need only to replace (iii) in (MID) with (iii*): (iii*) an occurrence of g as used by ref(a, u, t) has the same grammatical role in j as QUO(g) has in \u0000. The result of applying UNQ to the complement sentence in (18) is 'his father is a philtosopher'. That is not a sentence of English, but the account requires only that it be interpreted relative to the use by the attributor in the utterance context and the subject at the event time. (What if Nicola didn't mean anything very definite by 'philtosopher'? See the discussion below of nonsense words in complements of indirect discourse verbs.) We also sometimes intend to convey that specific words were used rather than synonyms or translations of them quite apart from cases in which we wish to convey that someone used a misspelling of a word (or a neologism or a malaprop). For example, consider this exchange: A: Brian said that he was allergic to \"gorse.\" B: I heard he said he was allergic to \"furze.\" A: No, he definitely said that he was allergic to \"gorse.\" This makes sense even if A and B both know that 'gorse' and 'furze' are synonyms. In this case, we invoke the strict reading to capture the sense of the exchange. 27 Is this an instance of scare quotes? Not if the intention is to attribute the word to Nicola. We can use scare quotes in indirect discourse without there being any suggestion that the subject used them: John said that he was into \"adult films\", though that is not what he called them. However, there may be a kind of dual use of the quotation marks when one both wants to attribute words to someone in indirect discourse and to distance oneself from them. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 28 What about a case in which someone uses a nonsense term (a term that didn't mean anything in the mouth of the subject of the sentence), as in (16)? (16) Nicola said that her father is a \"jabberwocky\". Here we intend the strict reading. These cases too can be accommodated as long as we allow that 'her father is a jabberwocky' can stand in the samesaying relation to some utterance of Nicola and allow translation to relate expressions that are not fully meaningful. (iii*) requires that the particular nonsense word in the complement be used rather than another, so no additional difficulties arise about getting the right target. Nothing in the account requires sentences that appear in complements to be fully meaningful or to have propositional content that determines truth conditions for them. A question arises about how to treat iterated indirect discourse as in (5e).28 (5e) Professor Elugardo said that Williams James said that religious leaders are \"creatures of exalted emotional sensibility.\" The question is whether this should be treated as saying that Professor Elugardo said something that is the same in content as (17) or (18). (17) Williams James said that religious leaders are \"creatures of exalted emotional sensibility.\" (18) Williams James said that religious leaders are creatures of exalted emotional sensibility. On the first reading, we are saying (roughly) that Professor Elugardo said that <William James said something whose content was that religious leaders are creatures of exalted emotional sensibility and he [James] used 'creatures of exalted emotional sensibility' in the appropriate position> (the angle brackets indicate the scope of the complement clause). On the second reading, we are saying (roughly) that Professor Elugardo said something that is the same in content as (18) while he [Elugardo] used 'creatures of exalted emotional sensibility' in an appropriate position. Our account says that (5e) attributes to Elugardo an assertion the same in content as (18) in which he used 'creatures of exalted emotional sensibility' (or a translation) in the grammatical role in which it appears in the complement of (5e)-this is the second interpretation. To get the first reading, we would use (19). (19) Professor Elugardo said that Williams James said that religious leaders are \"\"creatures of exalted emotional sensibility\"\". 28 This example was raised by Ray Elugardo as an objection to our earlier account. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 29 However, surely it is more natural to give (5e) the first interpretation on which the words are attributed to James and not Elugardo. One reason it may seem more natural is that we already know that William James used that phrase. Another is that the focus is on what James said, so that when quotation marks appear in the complement of the embedded attribution (in contrast to the NP of the embedded attribution) we may be inclined to take the speaker to be intending to convey something about the words with which James said it. But we can also get the other (second) reading for iterated indirect mixed quotation. Consider (20). (20) Though she said that he put it more politely, Sue told me that John complained that he was being \"jerked around by his asshole boss\" In this case, we interpret the speaker of (20) as intending to attribute to Sue the use of 'jerked around by his asshole boss' rather than to John. We react to (5e) and (20) by trying to figure out what the speaker could be intending, and we use whatever knowledge we have to help us arrive at a reasonable interpretation. We think it is doubtful there is much of a practice attached to iterated mixed quotation. We have only come across it in examples proposed by philosophers intended to test our account. Most likely, we interpret these on the fly using whatever information we can to divine the intentions of the speaker. If this is right, then we are not faced so much with the question of what interpretation the rules of the language give to (5e), but how to extend them to cover such cases. For this purpose, we recommend extending our account since it provides a systematic way of disambiguating the different readings speakers may intend. One could develop an alternative which made (5e) literally express the first reading by conditionalizing on whether \u0000\u0000in (MID) was itself an instance of indirect discourse, and giving a different treatment of embedded complements when it was, but this would make certain things we might want to say using iterated mixed quotation inexpressible by any literal interpretation. (Of course, the quotation marks in these cases can be interpreted strictly or non-strictly.) 5.2 Mixed Attitude Attributions The case of mixed attitude attributions as illustrated in (5f) is curious. (5) (f) She thought that it was curious that that \"thin, proud man\" should have had \"that little, sharp woman for a mother!\" In the case of direct attributions of thought, we treated the quotation term in the complement as giving the content of the thought interpreted relative to the context of the thought (the thinker and time of the thought). In indirect attitude attributions in non-mixed cases, it would seem that the difference is that the sentence in the complement is interpreted relative to the speaker rather than PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 30 the subject and time of the thought. What purpose could interpolation of quotation terms in attributions of thought on analogy with mixed indirect discourse serve? It is clear that mixed indirect attitude attributions are intended to provide a more finegrained characterization of the thought that is being attributed. In the case of direct attributions of thought, we suggested that we aim to use a sentence a translation of which the subject would be disposed to use to express her thought. With this in mind, we can make sense of the point of mixed indirect quotation, namely, to indicate that the thinker would be disposed to use translations of the material quoted in the complement in corresponding positions in announcing the thought in a sentence. Using (MID) as a template, we can give the following account in (MIA) (mixed indirect attitude) for attitude attributions, where we replace the quantifier over events with a quantifier over states. (This is given for the verb 'thought' but as above it provides a template that can be extended to other propositional attitude verbs.) (MIA) For all speakers u, times t, sentences \u0000, names a, [a thought that \u0000] is true(u, t, English) iff there is a state s and a time t' < t, such that (a) thinks(s, t', ref(a, u, t), UNQ(\u0000), u, t) and (b) If UNQ(\u0000) 1 \u0000, then (i) ref(a, u, t) is disposed to express s at t' using a sentence q that relative to ref(a, u, t) at t' is an index-shifted translation of UNQ(\u0000) understood relative to u at t and (ii) for all expressions g, and formulas y, if \u0000 = the result of replacing 'x' in y with QUO(g), then (iii) a translation of g into the language of the sentence q that ref(a, u, t) is disposed to use has the same grammatical role in q as QUO(g) has in \u0000. As above, there is a propositionalist version of clause (a) and we can make provision for a more strict use of quotation marks as well so that what is require is an index-shifted version of the sentence q itself. 6 Monstrous Operators Kaplan (1989) defined a 'monstrous operator' as one that shifts context of evaluation away from the context of utterance. Lepore and Cappelen (1997; 2003) have suggested that mixed quotation can involve this kind of shift. Here is an example from their 1997 paper: Mr. Greenspan said he agreed with Labor Secretary R.B. Reich \"on quite a lot of things\". Their accord on this issue, he said, has proved \"quite a surprise to both of us\". PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 31 In the second sentence, the 'us' in quotation marks is clearly intended to be interpreted relative to the context of Greenspan's utterance rather than the context of the report. The practice of replacing pronouns and indexicals in quoted material in complements so that when interpreted relative to the speaker's context the referent comes out correct is illustrated in (5c). In light of this, one might dismiss examples like these as careless and ungrammatical, an example of changing from indirect to direct quotation in midsentence and failing to notice. Without trying to settle this issue about usage, it is interesting to ask from the theoretical standpoint how such a practice could be accommodated in a semantics for a language. Take as a sample (21), (21) She said that \"of all of us\" she was \"the least happy camper\" where we assume that the speaker of (21) is not among those that the subject was talking about. We want to have the speaker say something to the effect: (22) She said that of all of them she was the least happy camper and she used a sentence that translates 'of all of us I am the least happy camper' in saying that. (MID) does not give us (22) because its clause (a) requires the speaker to say that she said that of all us she was the least happy camper, and this requires the speaker to include herself among those referred to, contrary to our assumption. The first thing to do is to transform the complement sentence into a sentence in which indexicals in quotation marks are replaced by bracketed indexicals that corefer, taken relative to the speaker's context, with those they replace taken relative to the subject's context. We use the following definition. (Def) \u0000' relative to x at t is an index-shifted transform of \u0000 relative to y at t' iff \u0000' is a mere indexical variant of \u0000\u0000such that for all \u0000\u0000such that QUO(\u0000) appears in \u0000, for every occurrence of any indexical or demonstrative d in \u0000 (unless in authorial brackets), in \u0000' there is in the same grammatical role as d in \u0000 an occurrence of an indexical (or directly referring term) d' in authorial brackets such that d' understood relative to x at t refers to the same thing as d\u0000understood relative to y at t'. Then we replace (a) in (MID) with (a*): (a) saying(e, t', ref(a, u, t), UNQ(\u0000), u, t) PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 32 (a*) there is an \u0000\u0000\u0000such that \u0000\u0000 relative to u at t is an index-shifted transform of \u0000 relative to ref(a, u, t) at t' and saying(e, t', ref(a, u, t), UNQ(\u0000\u0000), u, t) For the rest, we replace '\u0000' with '\u0000\u0000' in clause (b). 7 Translation Practices Before concluding, it is worth taking a glance at our practices in translating quotation, which raise some questions about the account presented here. When it is pure quotation that is in view, we translate the quotation marks but not the expression enclosed within it. (This is support for the view that quotation marks are not semantically inert but a distinct device in the language, and it is evidence against the proper name theory for which, as remarked, what is interior to the quotation remarks is nothing more than spelling.) Strikingly, however, translations for other forms of quotation, direct and mixed, often do not preserve the identity of the material in quotation marks. When we translate dialogue in fiction or in reporting, we typically translate the sentences that appear in quotation marks as well. Similarly, when we translate mixed quotation, we typically translate the expressions that appear in quotation marks as well. How is this compatible with the view that at the core of all of these uses of quotation marks is pure quotation? The answer is that ordinary translation does not aim to preserve faithfully every aspect of meaning. Sometimes this is because there is no best fit between the expressions in the target and home language. We can at best paraphrase the German 'torschlusspanik' into English as 'the fear of diminishing opportunities as one ages', because we have no one-word equivalent. But in other cases the trouble is that in preserving certain aspects of meaning we fail to convey something important about the function of the word or sentence in the original. The most literal translation of a poem may do a very bad job of conveying the literary qualities of the original. In other cases, the problem has to do with a function internal to the conventional rules for using the expressions. Tyler Burge (1978) pointed out that in cases of self-reference like 'This sentence is false' we do not aim, when we translate it into French or German, to preserve the referent of the subject term to the English sentence. What we would lose in this case is the fact that the subject term is used to refer to the sentence in which it appears. In a context in which we are interested in the phenomenon of self-reference, it is more important to preserve that in the translation than the reference to the English sentence. Burge noted that the same thing applies to translation of dialogue in novels. A translation of War and Peace into English in which all the Russian dialogue was left untranslated would not sell very many copies. Dialogue is what we called quasi-use quotation. For it to function as intended, the audience must understand the expressions contained in quotation marks (so far as possible-dialogue can contain nonsense words too). Preserving this function is more important in translation that preserving reference to the words that appear in the quotation marks. Furthermore, given the account of (non-strict) direct discourse we have given, the original sentence and its translation will still share the same truth value. These remarks carry over straightforwardly to direct attitude attributions and to mixed quotation. Thus, the fact that PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 33 reference to words in quotation marks, other than in pure quotation, is not preserved in translation is not a counterexample to the analyses offered above. 8 Conclusion In this paper we have argued for a unified account of quotation devices in natural languages. We have not argued that there is one analysis of all uses of quotation marks, but rather that though quotation is polysemous it is unified in that every form of quotation can be seen as making use of a core function of quotation marks, namely, their use in pure quotation. The general rule for pure quotation (GQ) For any expression f, QUOT(f) refers to f. is a remarkably simple and clear device that exploits the fact that expression types have tokens by which we recognize them. Uses of quotation that extend beyond pure quotation have two features in common.29 First, the material appearing in quotation marks is intended to be understood and that it is understood is essential to the function that such quotations play in communication (modulo a strict form of direct and indirect discourse), even though this does not always involve the expressions contributing their extensional properties to fixing truth conditions for the sentences in which they appear. Second, they appeal to a relation born to the expression appearing in quotation marks that plays a role in determining the truth conditions of the sentences in which they appear. Thus, in all of these uses, a reference to the expression in quotation marks is made in relation to which other things are characterized, such as some utterance someone has made or a thought she has had. References Burge, T. (1978). Self-Reference and Translation. In Guenthner & Guenthner-Reutter (Eds.), Meaning and Translation (pp. 137-156). London: Duckworth. Cappelen, H., & Lepore, E. (1997). Varieties of Quotation. Mind, 106, 429-450. Davidson, D. (1968). On Saying That. Synthese, 19, 130-146. 29 These remarks can be generalized to devices that function like quotation marks in enclosing an expression to form a term that refers to a type of entity related to the enclosed expression in some way. Thus, for example, putting a sentence in angle brackets to form a name of a proposition [<f>], or putting a word in all caps to refer to the concept it expresses 'RED', or Sellars's dot quotes, [•f•] which he used to refer to an entity individuated as finely as the enclosed sentence together with its interpretation all depend on the device that is exhibited in pure quotation. In all of these cases, the entity referred to is located relative to the sentence or expression flanked by the special delimiters and the fact that we understand the contained terms is essential to their functioning in the way they are intended to. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 34 - (1979). Quotation. Theory and Decision, 11, 27-40. - (2001). Theories of Meaning and Learnable Languages, Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation (pp. 3-15). New York: Clarendon Press. Geach, P. (1957). Mental Acts. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Gómez-Torrente, M. (2001). Quotation revisited. Philosophical Studies, 102, 123-153. Houston, K. (2013). Shady Characters: The Secret Life of Punctuation, Symbols & Typographical Marks. London: W. W. Norton Johnson, M. (2011). The Punctuation Theory of Quotation. In E. Brendel (Ed.), Understanding Quotation (pp. 209-230): De Gruyter Mouton. Kaplan, D. (1989). Demonstratives. In J. Almog, J. Perry & H. Wettstein (Eds.), Themes from Kaplan (pp. 481-564). New York: Oxford University Press. Lepore, E. (1999). The Scope and Limits of Quotation. In L. E. Hahn (Ed.), The Philosophy of Donald Davidson (pp. 691-714). Chicago: Open Court Publishers. Lepore, E., & Cappelen, H. (2003). Varieties of Quotation Revisited. Belgian Journal of Linguistics, 17, 51-75. Lepore, E., & Loewer, B. (1989). You Can Say That Again. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 14, 338-356. Ludwig, K. (2014). Propositions and higher-order attitude attributions. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 43, 741-765. Ludwig, K., & Ray, G. (1998). Semantics for Opaque Contexts. Philosophical Perspectives, 12, 141-166. Maier, E. (2014). Pure Quotation. Philosophy Compass, 9, 615-630. Pagin, P., & Westerstahl, D. (2010). Pure Quotation and General Compositionality. Linguistics and Philosophy, 33, 381-415. Predelli, S. (2003). Scare Quotes and Their Relation to Other Semantic Issues. Linguistics and Philosophy, 26, 1-28. Quine, W. V. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge: Technology Press of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Quine, W. V. O. (1940). Mathematical logic. New York,: W. W. Norton & company inc. Recanati, F. (2000). Oratio Obliqua, Oratio Recta. Cambridge: MIT Press. Recanati, F. (2001). Open quotation. Mind, 110, 637-687. Reimar, M. (1996a). Quotation Marks: Demonstratives or Demonstrations? Analysis, 56, 131-142. - (1996b). Quotation Marks: Demonstratives or Demonstrations? Analysis, 56, 131-42. Saka, P. (1998). Quotation and the Use-mention Distinction. Mind, 107, 113-135. - (2003). Quotational Constructions. Belgian Journal of Linguistics, 17, 187-212. - (2013). Quotation. Philosophy Compass, 8, 935-949. Tarski, A. (1983). The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics (pp. 152-27). Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company. Wallace, J. (1970). On the Frame of Reference. Synthese, 22, 117-150. PREPRINT In\tThe\tSemantics\tand\tPragmatics\tof\tQuotation,\teds.\tPaul\tSaka\tand\tMichael\tJohnson,\tSpringer\t2018:\t99-134. 35 Washington, C. (1992). The Identity Theory of Quotation. The Journal of Philosophy, 89, 582605."}
{"meta": {"title": "Unity in the scientific study of intellectual attention", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/article", "creator": "Fortney, Mark", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "I argue that using information from a cognitive representation to guide the performance of a primary task is sufficient for intellectual attention, and that this account of attention is endorsed by scientists working in the refreshing, n-back, and retro-cue paradigms. I modify and build on the work of Wayne Wu (2014), who developed a similarly motivated account, but for perceptual attention rather than intellectual attention. The way that I modify and build on Wu’s account provides a principled way of responding to Watzl’s (2011, 2017) challenge to Wu, according to which Wu’s style of account is unintuitively broad. The fact that I find unity in the practice of science puts us in a position to resist the claim that scientists studying intellectual attention frequently fail to study the same thing.", "date": "2020", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/FORUIT", "language": "en", "datestamp": "2020-05-08T18:33:42Z"}, "text": "Unity in the Scientific Study of Intellectual Attention Mark Fortney Accepted and Forthcoming in Canadian Journal of Philosophy Approximately 10,000 words. Please refer to published draft for citation. Abstract: I argue that using information from a cognitive representation to guide the performance of a primary task is sufficient for intellectual attention, and that this account of attention is endorsed by scientists working in the refreshing, n-back, and retro-cue paradigms. I build on the work of Wayne Wu (2014), who developed a similarly motivated account, but for perceptual attention rather than intellectual attention. The way that I build on Wu's account provides a principled way of responding to Watzl's (2011, 2017) challenge to Wu, according to which Wu's style of account is unintuitively broad. The fact that I find unity in the practice of science puts us in a position to resist the claim that scientists studying intellectual attention frequently failing to study the same thing. Keywords: Attention; Cognition; Stimulus-Independent Thought 2 1. Introduction1 Despite a recent surge of philosophical interest in attention, there remain deep and enduring disagreements about what sort of thing attention really is. 2 Wayne Wu (2014), in response to this problem, has helpfully proposed that we should identify a merely sufficient condition for attention that everyone, or at least a significant portion of the community, could agree on. Wu identifies, in particular, a sufficient condition for perceptual attention rather than every kind of attention. 3 According to Wu, using information from a personal level perceptual representation of an object in order to guide the performance of an experimental task is sufficient for perceptual attention to that same object.4 Wu bases this sufficient condition on an analysis of how psychologists study perceptual attention. On his view, analysing their experimental designs shows that his sufficient condition is something that they endorse. Having a sufficient condition for all the varieties of attention would allow us, as a community of researchers, to ask and answer questions about perceptual attention without needing to make divisive metaphysical commitments about its nature at the outset of any given investigation. This is an appealing goal that should be of interest to 1 Thanks to Dominic Alford-Duguid, Nate Charlow, Zachary Irving, Jorge Morales, Diana Raffman, Gurpreet Rattan, William Seager, Sonia Sedivy, and Wayne Wu for comments on versions of this paper. Thanks also to two anonymous referees for comments on the paper. 2 See Watzl 2011b for a discussion of some recent proposals. 3 In the same text, Wu's primary goal is to argue in favour of a view about the nature of attention and the relationship between attention and actions in general. But that is not the view of his that I discuss in this paper. For critical discussion of this other view, see Jennings & Nanay (2014), Buehler (2018a) and Buehler (2018b). 4 A sufficient condition is, roughly, a statement about one state of affairs whose truth would be sufficient for the truth of a statement about another related state of affairs. For example, if you think that knowledge just is justified true belief, you might think that the truth of \"Subject S knows that P\" is a sufficient condition for \"Subject S believes that P\". Or, for another example, if perceptual processing is a kind of mental processing, you might think that \"Process X is a perceptual process\" is a sufficient condition for \"Process X is a mental process\". 3 anyone who studies perceptual attention or some of the phenomena that attention is arguably closely linked with, such as agency and consciousness.5 This paper moves us towards having that more general sufficient condition on hand by taking two steps – bringing intellectual attention into the conversation and addressing a challenge that Sebastian Watzl (2011a, 2017) has raised for Wu's style of account, according to which the account of attention is significantly out of line with ordinary intuitions about attention. On the view that I develop, only some of the uses of information from personal level representations of objects to guide the performance of a task are sufficient for intellectual or perceptual attention: the uses of information that are for the sake of guiding the performance of an agent's primary tasks rather than her secondary tasks. I use the notion of \"cognitive resources\" and a \"task-relevant set\" of cognitive resources to explain the distinction between primary and secondary tasks. Cognitive resources are mental resources that agents can bring to bear in the performance of tasks. The taskrelevant set of cognitive resources for a task are the cognitive resources that an agent could gainfully allocate to the performance of the task. A task is primary for an agent if she allocates all or most of the resources in the task-relevant set to the performance of the task. I discuss these concepts, and the evidence that they underlie scientific inferences about attention, in fuller depth in the second section of the paper.6 5 See, e.g., Wu (2011a, 2011b, 2014) and Mole (2017) for discussions of the relationship between attention and agency, and Watzl (2011a) and Smithies (2011) for discussions of the relationship between attention and consciousness. 6 Buehler (2018b) argues that various specific selection for action based accounts of attention will \"overgenerate\" cases of attention. The selection for action based sufficient condition for intellectual attention that I consider in this paper is not one that Buehler considers, and moreover does not seem to face the problem of overgeneration. In fact, as this account is based on responding to the objection raised by Watzl (2011a, 2017) to Wu, it is an account designed to solve the problem of overgeneration (to be specific, the kind of overgeneration suggested by Watzl's counterexamples). 4 2. Intellectual Attention According to Wu, when a subject uses information from a personal-level perceptual representation of X to guide performance of an experimental task, what that subject is doing is sufficient for perceptual attention to X (Wu 2014 pp. 80-82). In that sufficient condition, \"personal level\" plays an important role by ensuring that the uses of information that are sufficient for attention are personal level uses of information. Personal level information and processes are information available to, and processes performed by, agents, rather than information that is available to a mere part of an agent, or a process that is performed by a mere part of an agent (I take this specific way of understanding the distinction from Wu 2014 p.13, see Dennett 1969 for an earlier discussion of the distinction).7 Paradigmatic personal level phenomena include things like deliberating and acting, and paradigmatic subpersonal phenomena include things like the regulation of cerebral blood flow. Intuitively, attention and the uses of information that are sufficient for attention seem like personal level phenomena. For instance, using information from a visual representation of an apple to guide the grasping of an apple itself seems personal level, and moreover seems sufficient for attention, which also seems personal level. Both of those seem to be more like deliberating and acting than like the regulation of cerebral blood flow. Watzl (2017) has recently offered substantial arguments, which go beyond my intuitive point above, in favour of the contention that attention should be categorized as a personal level phenomenon, rather than a subpersonal phenomenon (although Watzl argues that we should use the term 'subject' rather than 'person'). Watzl argues that at 7 Here I make the assumption that all persons are agents. 5 the subpersonal level, the neural realizations of attention are diverse enough that attempts to identify what attention consists in at the subpersonal level will fail (2017 pp. 27-34). In fact, there is relatively wide agreement among contemporary metaphysicians of attention that attention seems to be located at the level of agents or persons, rather than at the level of parts of agents, or parts of persons. Despite their varying disagreements about how to analyze attention, Mole (2011), Smithies (2011), Jennings (2012), Wu (2014), and Watzl (2017), for instance, all share the commitment that attention is a personal level mental phenomenon. Burge, before the appearance of those works that focus on the nature of attention in particular, also made the point that attention seems like a personal level phenomenon (2010 p. 372; his specific way of articulating this was to say that directing the attention is something we attribute to 'individuals'). The view that I defend in this paper differs from Wu's sufficient condition in two ways: first, it refers to intellectual attention rather than perceptual attention, and second, it invokes the notion of a primary task. Unlike Wu, I do not think that any kind of use of information to guide the performance of a task is sufficient for attention. On the view I argue for in this paper, a wide range of scientists studying intellectual attention using the n-back paradigm, the retro-cue paradigm, and the refreshing paradigm all believe that when a subject uses information from a cognitive representation of X to guide the performance of a primary task, what that subject is doing is sufficient for intellectual attention to X. Going forward, I will sometimes call this \"my sufficient condition\" or \"the sufficient condition for intellectual attention\". Before we go on, there are two important notes to make about the idea of a \"cognitive representation\" and a \"primary task\". 6 In this paper, by \"cognitive\" I mean \"stimulus-independent\" (See Burge 2010 p. 378, and Beck 2012 p. 586, for discussions of this demarcation between the perceptual and the cognitive, also Beck 2017). On this way of thinking, stimulus-independent mental representations do not require active causal links with the objects that they are about in order to continue to exist. So, for example, a visual representation of an apple is stimulusdependent, while a representation of an apple in memory is stimulus-independent.8 For instance, seeing an apple requires an active causal link with some nearby apple, and therefore the representations involved in that seeing are stimulus-dependent. By contrast, thinking about an apple that you saw yesterday does not require such an active link with that apple, and therefore the representations involved in that thinking are stimulus-independent. Second, as I mentioned in the introduction, shifting from \"experimental task\" to \"primary task\" marks a significant disagreement between Wu and myself about how scientists study attention. Wu believes, roughly, that scientists studying attention believe that as long as a subject is using information to guide a task performance, then that subject is attending. But I will argue that a closer analysis of the practice of science shows that scientists have a more careful view, according to which the manner in which the task was performed should enter into our considerations. Specifically, I'll argue that scientists treat uses of information that subserve \"primary tasks\" as sufficient for attention, and that primary tasks are tasks that subjects are taking seriously through allocating all or 8 Here I distinguish between perception and cognition in the same way that I do in Fortney (2018). Analysing cognition in terms of stimulus-independence correctly categorizes the paradigm cases of cognition and perception that we discussed in the introduction, which is one point in favour of the analysis. Additionally, as we will see later in the paper, it is a way of understanding the demarcation that seems to be in line with the way that many scientists studying intellectual attention seem to understand the demarcation. 7 most of the relevant cognitive resources to the performance of the task. (the idea of a primary task is explained in more depth below.) 2.1 The empirical support First I will provide a partial account of how Wu motivates acceptance of his sufficient condition for perceptual attention. Then I will give the argument for accepting my sufficient condition for intellectual attention. In short, Wu's argument for accepting his sufficient condition for perceptual attention is that it seems to be implicitly presupposed by many psychologists when they come to conclusions about perceptual attention, and, moreover, that explicitly endorsing the sufficient condition that psychologists implicitly presuppose would be a good idea (Wu 2014 pp. 38-39). The latter claim is where the most interesting argumentative work is being done. What motivates this claim is, I take it, that one obvious route to finding a relatively uncontroversial sufficient condition for attention is to identify a sufficient condition for attention that a large group of theorists already accept. Part of what motivates the former claim is Wu's analysis of the inferences that psychologists make when studying perceptual attention in three research paradigms: dichotic listening, visual search, and spatial cueing. In short, an acceptance of his sufficient condition seems to underlie many of the inferences these psychologists make when they move from observations of behaviour to conclusions about the distribution of participants' perceptual attention. But, even more importantly, Wu's thought is that such a method of justification for their inferences provides a unifying explanation of the inferences of psychologists who work in several different research paradigms. Unifying explanations of this kind are valuable because they reveal that – although these psychologists might, on the surface, appear to use the word \"attention\" in different ways – a large group of them are actually using the word in the same way when they come to conclusions about attention (see Wu 8 2014 pp. 270-271). Endorsing such a theory of attention, therefore, goes along with being able to explain why we have good reason to resist the claim that the scientific study of attention is relatively disunified. In the rest of this section, I'll first explain how Wu argues that psychologists working on visual search seem to endorse his sufficient condition. Then I will go on to explain how work in a variety of experimental paradigms motivates the empirical sufficient condition for intellectual attention. In the visual search paradigm, participants are instructed to press a button as soon as they see a pre-specified \"target\" object on a computer screen that is also displaying some \"distractor\" objects (here I follow Wu's summary of the paradigm; see Wu 2014 pp. 19-21). Psychologists seem to take these subjects' responses, via button pressing, as evidence that the subjects have perceptually attended to the target objects. Wu takes this to be a sign that the psychologists implicitly endorse his sufficient condition, because the subjects that perform the task seem like they are using information from perceptual representations of target objects to guide the performance of their task of button pushing. According to the sufficient condition for perceptual attention, such a use of information is sufficient for perceptual attention to the target objects (Wu 2014 pp. 38-39). We can now move to the empirical support for the claim that psychologists implicitly endorse my sufficient condition. I'll discuss the inferences made by psychologists working in the \"refreshing paradigm\", the \"retro-cue paradigm\", and the \"n-back paradigm\". I will argue, like Wu, that it seems like an implicit acceptance of the sufficient condition would justify the inferences some psychologists make about attention on the basis of the observed behaviours of their subjects. The posit that they implicitly accept the sufficient condition for intellectual attention, therefore, provides a 9 unifying explanation of what justifies the conclusions that this diverse set of psychologists comes to about intellectual attention. In a simple version of the refreshing paradigm, participants are exposed to a series of slides displaying words, one at a time, interspersed with the occasional slide that displays a single black dot instead of a word. They are instructed to read aloud the words on the slides, and to think of (\"refresh\") and say the previous word they saw when they are exposed to a black dot. This is what a series of slides in the refreshing paradigm looks like: Figure 1: The Refreshing Paradigm Psychologists seem to think that, when subjects respond to the black dots by saying the previous word that they were exposed to, they have intellectually attended to the 10 previous word that they saw.9 The sufficient condition for intellectual attention clearly provides one explanation of the way in which that thought could be justified. It seems like, in this paradigm, participants must have used information from cognitive representations of the previous word they had seen to guide their performance of the \"respond to a black dot\" task. According to the sufficient condition, if they also treated this task as primary, that is sufficient for intellectual attention to the previous words they saw.10 My argument that in general, psychologists only analyse the tasks of participants who treat experimental tasks as primary, comes in the following section of the paper. Secondly, in a simple version of the retro-cue paradigm, participants see a slide with four differently coloured Xs on each slide, each in a different corner of the slide. The participants then see a slide which either has a cue that points to where one of the Xs used to be (call this the informative condition) or a neutral cue that points in all four directions (call this the neutral condition). Then, on the final slide, a coloured X is presented. Participants press a button indicating whether an X of that colour had been present on the initial slide. Here is an example of what a series of slides from the informative condition of retro-cue paradigm looks like: 9 Here I describe the simplest version of the refreshing paradigm in the same way as I do in Fortney (2018) . See Johnson et al. (2002 p. 64) for this task, and Johnson et al. (2005 p. 340) for the explicit assertion that 'refreshing' (which is required by responding to the dot) entails attention. For more work in the refreshing paradigm see, e.g., Raye et al. (2002), Chen & Cowan (2009), Higgins & Johnson (2009), and Johnson et al. (2013). See Fortney (2018) also for an explanation of how this study might bear on the study of whether the phenomenology of conscious cognition can be structured by attention. 10 Here is an objection to this line of thought: participants in the refreshing paradigm use their \"iconic memory\" to respond to the dots, and iconic memory counts as a variety of perceptual representation. In the refreshing paradigm, however, words and dots were presented for 2,250 ms, and there were 500ms gaps between presentations of words and dots, which suggests that iconic memory was not at work in the refreshing paradigm (Higgins and Johnson 2009 p. 167). These durations exceed recent investigations into the duration of iconic memory (Rensink 2017). 11 Figure 2: The Retro-Cue Paradigm In this paradigm, it turns out that participants respond more quickly in the informative condition than in the neutral condition. Psychologists seem to take this to be evidence that the participants attended to the cued X in response to the cues.11 The sufficient condition for intellectual attention, again, provides one justificatory route from the participants' observed behaviours to the psychologists' conclusions. It seems like participants, in responding to a cue, must have used information from a cognitive representation of the initial slide to guide their performance of the \"make sure to remember the cued X\" task (a subtask in the overall task of \"responding correctly to the query that will eventually come\"). By the sufficient condition, if they were also treating 11 See, e.g., Astle et al. (2012) p. 149 for the task and p. 151 paragraph 4 for the inference. See also Griffin & Nobre (2003), Lepsien et al. (2005), Matsukura et al. (2007), and Makovski et al. (2008), for more examples of work in the retro-cue paradigm. 12 this task as primary, that is sufficient for intellectual attention to the cued region of the initial slide. Lastly, consider the n-back paradigm. Participants in the n-back paradigm see a series of letters one by one. The task is to press a button when the n-th back letter in the series is identical to the letter that they are currently viewing (call such a letter a \"target letter\"). The set of slides below is an example some slides from the 3-back condition – for expository purposes, the \"target letters\" are outlined rather than solid. The idea is that a participant looking at any of the outlined letters ought to press a button to indicate their awareness that the outlined letters are identical to the letters on the third slide back. Figure 3: The n-Back Paradigm Participants complete the n-back task more rapidly and accurately in the 1-back condition than in the other conditions. Many psychologists explain this discrepancy 13 between reaction times by saying that in the 1-back condition, participants can respond as quickly as they do because they were already attending to the previously seen 1-back letter, and can immediately compare it to the currently seen letter. By contrast, for participants in the 2-or-more-back condition, some additional processing of some sort (e.g. retrieval from memory) must go on before participants can attend to a previously seen letter so as to compare it to a currently seen letter.12 Again, the sufficient condition for intellectual attention shows us how the observed behaviours of the participants can be used to justify the psychologists' conclusions. It seems like participants in the 1-back task must have used information from their cognitive representations of previously seen letters to complete the 'respond to 1-back target letters' task. Similarly, it seems like participants in other versions of the task must have used information in just the same way after doing some extra work first (on the view of many psychologists working with the n-back paradigm, this extra work is bringing the letters to mind, or remembering them). By the sufficient condition, if the participants were also treating their tasks as primary, those two ways of responding to target letters are both sufficient for intellectual attention to target letters. The sufficient condition for intellectual attention therefore appears to be endorsed by a wide variety of psychologists working in a variety of different research paradigms. Moreover, the sufficient condition gives a unifying explanation of these psychologists' conclusions; i.e., it allows us to say that these psychologists are all actually talking about the same phenomenon, despite outward variation in the details of what 12 See McElree (2006 pp. 188-190) for this inference. For more examples of work in the n-back paradigm, see Dobbs & Rule (1989), Cohen et al. (1994) & (1997), Smith & Jonides (1997). 14 they have to say about what \"attention\" means. This is a compelling pair of reasons to endorse the sufficient condition for intellectual attention.13 That being said, the evidence above is compatible with two theses about intellectual attention rather than just the thesis I mean to defend in this paper: one according to which scientists believe that any use of information from a cognitive representation to guide the performance of a task is sufficient for intellectual attention, and another according to which scientists believe that the use of information from cognitive representations to guide performance is sufficient for intellectual attention only when the performance is performance of a primary task. The latter sufficient condition is the topic of this paper. In the next section of the paper I argue that a closer analysis of the practice of the study of attention reveals that scientists endorse this latter idea.14 3. Varieties of Selection Sebastian Watzl has argued that selecting an object, in general, seems insufficient for attention, and so we should not try to explain attention in term of selection for action (Watzl 2011a pp. 154-55). I agree with his first move, but think instead that his 13 My own sufficient condition is a consequence of Wu's thesis about what's necessary and sufficient for attention, and so he would endorse it (Wu 2014). But what I have done is provide alternative, and less controversial grounds, for my sufficient condition than Wu's thesis about attention – I have relied just on my analysis of the practice of science rather than a broad and controversial thesis about the metaphysics of attention. 14 Through my analysis of recent empirical work on intellectual attention, I have argued that a wide range of psychologists studying intellectual attention all endorse a particular sufficient condition for intellectual attention. I am, therefore, roughly in agreement with a diverse range of theorists including Mole (2011), Jennings (2012), and Watzl (2017), all of who have the goal of conceptualizing attention in a monistic way. That is, we all believe that a wide range of cases of attention have one thing in common (what we disagree about is what that one thing really is). This approach is different from the pluralistic approach of Taylor (2015, 2017), who has argued that attention is in fact many things rather than one thing. Taylor also argues that some psychologists, like Carrasco (2011), are pluralists about attention (Taylor 2017 p. 936). This approach is also different from the approach of Anderson (2011), who says that there is no such thing as attention. In this paper I develop a novel monistic view of the metaphysics of attention, but do not argue for the merits of a monistic approach in general. 15 observation should cause us to refine my sufficient condition for intellectual attention rather than to abandon it. In this section and the next I will explain how to do so. According to Watzl, it seems like we can attend to a conversation, and during that conversation, pick up a cup and take a sip from it, while never attending to the cup. Similarly, it seems possible that while you attend to a conversation, you might think about the cup, but that you could manage to do so without the cup actually engaging your attention – the thinking might have occurred merely at the \"back\" of your mind. But picking up the cup, and thinking about the cup, do require using information from a personal level representation of the cup to guide the performance of a task, so my sufficient condition for intellectual attention and Wu's sufficient condition for perceptual attention say that both of those uses of information to guide the performance of a task are sufficient for attention. In general, endorsing the sufficient conditions comes along with a difficulty in explaining what it could be to perform a task without, in so doing, attending to some object. It is possible to argue that Watzl's counterexamples should not actually motivate us to change our theory of attention. One method of replying to counterexamples like these is to say that the sufficient condition for intellectual attention is driven by the practice of science, and not whatever intuitions about attention the folk might be unfortunate enough to have. On this way of thinking, all Watzl's cases show us is that a consequence of the best theory of attention is that we should try to revise some of our intuitions about attention. But this should seem like a misguided method of reply, as long as one pays careful enough attention to the science. Alan Allport, a psychologist that Wu credits with being one of the first adherents of the view that attention is tightly connected with selection for 16 action, would probably agree with Watzl's basic critical claim. 15 Allport believes, for instance, that when you reach for an apple, you might only attend to the apple, even though you might use information from other perceptual representations to help guide your task performance (Allport 1987 pp. 396-97). This fact at least complicates the claim that deference to the practice of science gives us a reason to resist refining the sufficient conditions. Indeed, what it suggests is that a closer analysis of the practice of science will reveal that what scientists actually endorse is a refined version of the sufficient conditions. And it does seem independently plausible to suggest that there is an inattentive mode of cognition. Consider, to illustrate this point, Christopher Mole's description of a devoted but tired scholar: His reading of the book before him is prompted by genuine interest, but having spent the whole day trying to ignore the pangs of hunger, the children in the next room, and the radio that is playing downstairs, he is no longer able to concentrate. His reading is prompted by interest, but it is not attentive. (Mole 2011 pp. 4849). Mole's description of this case seems apt: there seems to be an inattentive mode of thought as well as an attentive mode of thought, and the scholar is failing to engage in the attentive mode of thought. How, then, should we square this information with the fact that the psychologists I discussed in the second section of this paper seemed to endorse the unrefined sufficient condition for intellectual attention? On my view, they believe that selecting objects to guide the performance of tasks that we take seriously are sufficient for attention, while other varieties of selection are insufficient for attention. Here is some representative 15 See Wu 2014 pp. 76-83 for Wu's interpretation of Allport. 17 textual evidence: Participants were instructed to respond within 300 ms of the tone. They were informed that responses longer than 300 ms were too long and that responses faster than 120 ms were anticipations. (McElree 2001 p. 8) Items were presented at a 2.5-s rate (2 s on, 0.5-s interitem interval), and response times were collected via voice key. Responses were recorded on audiotape; trials in which the voice key was triggered by erroneous responses, coughs, or other extraneous sounds were discarded. (Johnson et al. 2002 p. 4) These notes about their practices of discarding data are present in almost every study of McElree's and Johnson's that makes use of the refreshing paradigm or the n-back paradigm. In general, Johnson and her colleagues are not interested in studying incorrect task performances, and McElree and his colleagues are not interested in task performances that take longer than 300 ms. What seems to explain this practice is that these psychologists were not interested in studying task completions of participants that were not taking the task very seriously. Why might they be interested only in the task completions that participants took seriously? A natural explanation is that these psychologists presupposed that uses of information to guide the performance of a task that a participant was not taking seriously would be insufficient for attention. Johnson's thought seems to be that the refreshing task is so easy that if you got it wrong you could not have been doing it attentively, while McElree's and Wagers' thought seems to be that if you take longer than 300ms to respond 18 to their tasks, then you are not doing it attentively.16 This fact about how these scientists discard data also shows us what is mistaken about a move that Wu makes while developing his sufficient condition for perceptual attention into a complete account of the metaphysics of attention – a move that I mentioned in the introduction above. When, in an early formulation of his sufficient condition for perceptual attention, Wu argues for dropping the word \"experimental\" from the phrase \"experimental task\" he says: It seems unduly narrow, however, to restrict the notion of a task in the sufficient condition to these specific experimental paradigms. After all, in performing these tasks, subjects do the sorts of things they do all the time: they say things, look, listen, and produce responsive movements. While psychologists have focused on a specific set of tasks in investigating attention, there is nothing special about the tasks that give psychologists special access to attention. (Wu 2014 pp. 83-84) The problem with that line of thought is that experimental tasks are special, but not in virtue of being a particular kind of task, like listening to something or looking for something. The thing that is special about experimental tasks is the manner in which they are performed. They performed in a serious manner, not a slapdash manner. Psychologists that study attention set up experimental tasks and analyze them in such a way that the participants tend to take their tasks seriously, and these psychologists strive to only analyze the behavior of participants that take their tasks seriously. When 16 c.f. Wu's remarks on participants performing experimental tasks poorly: \"Obviously, when subjects are not doing the task, say when they twiddle their thumbs or continuously get things wrong, this is evidence that they are not appropriately selecting the relevant target and are being inattentive.\" (2014 p. 39). It probably is the case that many instances of discarded data are to be explained by the participant not having done the task. But it's important to note that in the cases I discuss in this part of the chapter, the inattentive participants did complete the tasks – they just didn't complete them according to a fairly exacting standard. If the participants hadn't actually completed the task, then we would not have evidence that psychologists think that uses of information to guide a certain range of task performances are insufficient for attention. 19 they analyze the task performances that they're interested in, they seem to behave as though task completion is sufficient for attention, but that's because – in advance – they have curated the set of task completions that they are analyzing and discussing. That is why simply dropping the word \"experimental\" from one of the sufficient conditions for attention would be a mistake. What all of this suggests is that we should amend the sufficient condition for intellectual attention, by instead saying that when a participant uses information from a cognitive representation to guide the performance of a task that she is taking seriously, then she is intellectually attending to the object that the representation is about. In the next section of the paper I'll explain, in less casual terms, what we should mean by \"taking a task seriously\". 3.1 Primary and Secondary Tasks In what follows, I'll adopt Christopher Mole's conception of \"task\", which aims to be a \"regimentation of common-sense usage rather than ... an innovation\" (Mole 2011 p. 52). Here is how Mole introduces the concept of a task: A subject's 'tasks', as these are to be understood here, are the things that the subject is in the business of doing and that she is active with. To specify the tasks in which an agent is engaged, we adopt the agent's point of view on her own activities. Normal human tasks are things such as making a cup of tea, following a conversation, or looking for the car keys. They are activities with natural descriptions of a sort that the subject would typically accept as a description of her goal.... 'What task is this agent performing?', when asked outside the lab, may admit of many answers, some of which are only vaguely true. (Mole 2011p. 52). The problem cases that we have discussed so far have all involved agents engaged in various kinds of tasks, e.g. following a conversation, picking up a cup, thinking about a cup, thinking about a letter, and thinking about a word. These are all what Mole called 20 \"normal human tasks\", and when we adopt the point of view of the subjects in Watzl's thought experiments, or in the psychologists' actual experiments, we can come to conclusions about what tasks the subjects seem to be engaged in. Another aspect of Mole's account of tasks is that agents can allocate various amounts of their cognitive resources to the tasks that they perform (Mole 2011 p. 53). For Mole, cognitive resources are personal level mental states or processes, like visual states, or ideas, rather than sub-personal mental states, like, e.g. a representation of hormone levels in the pituitary gland. Consider, for example, the task of sneaking across a room without being seen by the people that are inside it. There are various cognitive resources that an agent might be able to bring to bear on the performance of that task – e.g., her visual awareness of obstacles in the room, or her ideas about how to distract the people inside of the room, and so on. We can use Mole's idea that people can allocate varying amounts of cognitive resources to the performance of a task in elucidating what it is to take a task seriously. Just as it is ordinary to explain a person's behavior through saying that they are engaged in a particular task, it is ordinary to explain a persons' behavior in virtue of the fact that they are engaged in an important, or \"primary\" task, and a less important, or \"secondary\" task. Here is a more precise way of getting at the idea of \"primary\" and \"secondary\" tasks. For an agent A and a task T: (i) Call the cognitive resources that A could gainfully allocate to the performance of T the \"task-relevant cognitive resources for T\". If A allocates all or most of the task-relevant cognitive resources for T to the performance of T, then T is a primary task for A. (ii) If A is performing T but T is not a primary task for A, then T is a secondary task for A. Here is an example of that will help demonstrate how this analysis works. Suppose that 21 for A, the task-relevant cognitive resources for summing 1+1 are 10% of her total cognitive resources, and that the task-relevant cognitive resources for playing the clarinet are 50% of her total cognitive resources, and that the task relevant cognitive resources for summing 1+1 are a proper subset of the task-relevant cognitive resources for planning what to have for dinner. These are some verdicts that my analysis would make about A's potential ways of allocating her cognitive resources to these two tasks: (i) A could allocate 10% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 10% of the task-relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make both tasks secondary tasks for herself. (ii) A could allocate 90% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 90% of the task relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make both tasks primary tasks for herself. (iii) A could allocate 90% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 10% of the task-relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make both the former task a primary task for herself, and the latter task a secondary task for herself. (iv) A could allocate 10% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 90% of the task relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make the former task a secondary task for herself, and the latter task a primary task for herself. The distinction between primary tasks and secondary tasks puts us in a position fully appreciate my sufficient condition for intellectual attention, according to which uses of information that are for the sake of a primary task are the uses of information that are sufficient for attention: Sufficient Condition for Intellectual Attention: Subject S intellectually attends to X if S cognitively selects X to guide performance of some primary task. I think that this sufficient condition does a good job of capturing our intuitions about 22 attention. Consider the intuitions about attention that we have when we consider the four cases above: (i) A could allocate 10% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 10% of the task-relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make both tasks secondary tasks for herself. As a consequence, her performance of both tasks is slapdash. In so doing, her uses of information to guide the performances of both tasks seem insufficient for attention. (And as long as we assume that A is not engaged in any other tasks across this span of time, then A had no primary tasks across this span of time). (ii) A could allocate 90% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 90% of the task relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make both tasks primary tasks for herself at the same time. As a consequence, her performance of both tasks is excellent. In so doing, all of her uses of information to guide the performances of either task seem sufficient for attention. (iii) A could allocate 90% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 10% of the task-relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make both the former task a primary task for herself, and the latter task a secondary task for herself. As a consequence, her performance of the former task is excellent and her performance of the latter task is slapdash. In so doing, her uses of information to guide the performance of the former task seem sufficient for attention, and her uses of information to guide the performance of the latter task seem insufficient for attention. (iv) A could allocate 10% of the task-relevant set for summing 1+1 to the task of summing 1+1, and 90% of the task relevant set for playing the clarinet to playing the clarinet, and in so doing make the former task a secondary task for herself, and the latter task a primary task for herself. In so doing, her uses of information to guide the performance of the former task seem insufficient for attention, and her uses of information to guide the performance of the latter task seem sufficient for attention. The fact that my sufficient condition does a good job of capturing our intuitions about 23 attention is a reason that speaks in favour of endorsing it 17 . Secondly, my sufficient condition is motivated by the way that Johnson et al., McElree, and Wagers seem to understand intellectual attention. Thirdly, this sufficient condition does not face the intuitive problems brought up by Watzl (2011a, 2017), as I am about to argue.18 Before we go on, here is an important note about the role that cognitive resources play in my theory of attention. My claim is that when we make tasks primary for ourselves, we are attending, and that what makes a task primary is the way we have allocated cognitive resources to that task. This claim is about the metaphysics of attention rather than the epistemology of attention, and does not imply that we should typically base our conclusions about whether a subject has attended on the basis of evidence that directly concerns the distribution of cognitive resources. Usually, it makes sense to try to figure out whether people are making a task primary and attending through analysing the qualities of their task performances rather than through analysing their distribution of cognitive resources. This is just what psychologists do, as I argued above. Philosophers of mind that adopt my theory of attention should do the same. Here is an example of how to do that based on Barbara Montero's recent analysis of chess playing while summing numbers (Montero 2019). Montero describes an informal experiment she ran, in which master-ranked chess players played \"lightning\" 17 Note that making a task primary for oneself does not necessarily mean that one will do a good job at it: that depends on one's competence and potentially other background factors. In the cases above, for simplicity, I assume that the the subject is competent at all the tasks in question. 18 Like Mole (2011) I use cognitive resources to explain attention, but I make very different use of them. Mole argues that the use of \"background\" resources, that a subject does not put to the performance of a task and could not be gainfully put to the performance of a task, are relevant to whether a subject attends in performing that task (Mole 2011 p. 51). According to Mole, if some of the background set of resources is in use for some additional purpose, even while what I call the entire-task relevant set of cognitive resources is allocated to the performance of a task, then what he calls \"cognitive unison\" has been broken and a subject is not attending in performing that task. Taylor (2015) has persuasively argued that this is an unintuitive result for Mole's theory of attention. My account of attention, according to which the background set of cognitive resources is irrelevant to attention, does not generate such a result. 24 chess (in which chess players must make their moves very quickly) against other masterranked opponents. Crucially, just one player per game had to sum numbers. Summing single digit numbers did not seem to significantly impact their performance, while summing double-digit numbers seemed to significantly worsen their performance. Here is how Montero describes the report of one player, after he performed the more difficult version of the experiment He performed the addition correctly-though at one point pausing for around five seconds before giving an answer-but he lost the game and was not at all pleased with his performance. In response to my question 'How do you feel you did?\" he replied: \"What do you mean, how do I feel? How do you think I feel? I'm playing an IM [international master] while adding double-digit numbers. I'll tell you how I feel: I'm going to go back to the cabin right now and slit my wrists.' ... his perception was that adding the numbers significantly interfered with his performance. (Montero 2019 p. 388) Here, the chess player is complaining that he could not perform at his best because summing the double-digit numbers prevented him from doing so (unlike summing the single-digit numbers). My account of attention says that on account of his good performance in the single digit condition, we can conclude that the chess player was making chess playing primary for himself, and therefore attending to chess playing. This is an example of a judgment about attention that we can make which does not rely on the direct observation and individuation of cognitive resources. 4. Solving Watzl's problem In his challenge to selection-for-action theories of attention, Watzl presented two cases where a subject was engaged in two tasks at the same time, and in which the subject seemed to be using information to guide the performance of both tasks, and yet not really attending to the object involved in one of the tasks. The first case was being engrossed in a conversation while picking up a cup without attending to the cup, and 25 the second was being engrossed in a conversation while thinking about a cup, without attending to that cup. What we're now in a position to appreciate is that Watzl's problem cases are under-described. He tells us that the subject succeeded in simultaneously following the conversation and picking up the cup, and succeeded in simultaneously following the conversation and thinking about the cup. But he didn't specify the manner in which the subject allocated cognitive resources to those two tasks, and differences in that manner of allocation can lead to very different intuitive verdicts about how the subject deployed her attention – intuitive verdicts that my refined sufficient condition for intellectual attention help us straightforwardly predict. Imagine, for example, that the task-relevant set of cognitive resources for picking up the cup or thinking about the cup comprised 20% of the subject's total cognitive resources, and that the task-relevant set of cognitive resources for following the conversation comprised 90% of the subject's total cognitive resources, and that 10% of the subject's total cognitive resources were elements of both of those task-relevant sets. Imagine further that the subject allocated 100% of the task-relevant set for following the conversation to following the conversation, and 50% of the task-relevant set for thinking about the cup or picking up the cup to either of those two tasks. The refined sufficient condition for intellectual attention, unlike the unrefined sufficient condition, does not identify the uses of information to guide the performance of the thinking about the cup as sufficient for attention. 19 An analogously modified 19 I am assuming that in the case under discussion, the subject was using information from cognitive representations to guide her thought about the cup. But it does seem possible for us to use information from both perceptual and cognitive representations to guide our thought about certain objects. 26 version of Wu's sufficient condition for perceptual attention predicts that the uses of information to guide the performance of picking up the cup would not be sufficient for attention. Therefore, this is the kind of resource allocation that seems to underlie Watzl's intuitive verdict about the case. But it is worth pointing out that things could have gone differently in such a dualtasking case. Imagine, for example, that the task-relevant set of cognitive resources for picking up the cup or thinking about the cup comprised 10% of the subject's total cognitive resources, and that the task-relevant set of cognitive resources for following the conversation comprised 90% of the subject's total cognitive resources, and – most crucially that there was no overlap between the task-relevant sets of cognitive resources. In this sort of case, the subject could have allocated 100% of the task-relevant cognitive resources for both of her tasks to her performances of both those tasks. And in this sort of case, we have the intuition that the subject's uses of information to guide the performances of both of her tasks are sufficient for attention, because in this case the subject is dual-tasking just as well as she single-tasks. So refining the sufficient condition solves Watzl's problem. If a subject is engrossed in a conversation, but making some thought about a cup a secondary task for herself, the refined sufficient condition does not predict that her uses of information in service of that latter task are sufficient for intellectual attention (because it remains silent on such cases). 5. Additional Objections from Watzl One of the main contributions of this paper was to respond to the objection of Watzl (2011a, 2017) that using information to guide the performance of a task does not 27 seem sufficient for attention. Watzl (2017) raises further objections for the idea that we should explain attention in terms of selection for action, i.e., in terms of using information to guide the performance of a primary task (here I give my way of thinking of selection, which is narrower than Wu's). There is no space here in which to address all of Watzl's further objections, but we can close with seeing what is wrong with two of the briefer ones, one about the temporal shape of attention, and one about degreed attention.20 My way of addressing the temporal shape of attention is available to any selection for action theorist, as the temporal shape objection rests on a misinterpretation of the term \"selection\". My way of addressing degreed attention is particular to my way of understanding selection, in terms of using information to guide primary tasks rather than secondary tasks. Watzl's argument about temporal shape goes roughly like this: Attention and selection have different temporal shapes. Attention is an ongoing, uncountable process, whereas selection is a dated event. Therefore, we cannot explain attention in terms of selection (Watzl 2017 p.111). This argument fails because it trades on an ordinary understanding of selection rather than selection as it is defined by selection for action theorists. I consider selection to be \"using information from a personal level representation to guide the performance of a primary task\", and Wu also construes selection in terms of persons using information. On this way of thinking, using information is an ongoing, uncountable process, just like attention. The problematic 20 For further discussion of how to reply to these objections to the selection for action account, see Wu (2018). 28 commitment that Watzl attributes to the selection for action theorist is not a commitment that the selection for action theorist ever had. Watzl also claims that degreed attention poses a challenge to the selection for action theorists: \"Selection does not seem to come in degrees. Either you are selecting something or you are not; you are not selecting one thing more than another.\" (Watzl 2017 p.112) On my view, if we wish to use \"attention\" in a degreed way rather than an all-or-nothing way, we can answer the question \"To what degree did the agent attend to that object?\" through citing the degree to which the subject made the relevant task performance a primary task performance for herself. If, e.g., a subject allocates 20% of the cognitive resources in the task-relevant set to the performance of a task we could say that, in using information from various objects to perform the task, she attended to those objects to a low degree. If, by contrast, the subject allocates 100% of the cognitive resources in the task relevant set to the performance of the task, we can say that she attended to the relevant objects to a high degree. This method of reply is available to me rather than other selection for action theorists because I use the concept of a task relevant set of cognitive resources to help explain attention. 29 6. Conclusion In this paper, I've accomplished a few interrelated goals through arguing that using information from a cognitive representation to guide the performance of a primary task is sufficient for intellectual attention.21 First, my discussion helps bring intellectual attention into view as a philosophical phenomenon; in recent years, most sustained philosophical work on attention has been on perceptual attention. Second, I've put theorists in a position to defend the idea that there is unity in the scientific study of attention. Third, I've given theorists like Wu, who explain attention in terms of selection for action, the resources to reply to critics like Watzl, who claims that such accounts are too broad. 21 The sufficient condition I endorse in this paper is, of course, compatible with pluralism about attention, as long as there turns out to be some other well-supported sufficient condition for intellectual attention (Taylor 2015 & 2017 argues for pluralism about attention in general). For instance, suppose that mindwandering is best conceptualized as unguided attention, and that at least some of the unguided attention that constitutes mind-wandering is the intellectual variety of attention (See Irving 2016 for this definition of mind-wandering). If both of those assumptions are right, as well as my arguments in favour of my taskbased sufficient condition, then we would have reason to endorse the claim that there are two fairly different varieties of intellectual attention, that can be identified in terms of different sufficient conditions. 30 References Astle, D., Summerfield, J., Griffin, I., & Nobre, A. (2012). \"Orienting attention to locations in mental representations\". Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics. 74:146–162 Allport, A. (1987). \"Selection for Action: Some Behavioral and Neurophysiological Considerations of Attention and Action.\" In H. Heuer (Editor) and A. F. Sanders (eds.), Perspectives on Perception and Action. Erlbaum. Anderson, B. (2011). \"There is no such thing as attention\". Frontiers in Psychology, 246: 1-8. Backer, K., and Alain, C. (2013). Attention to memory: orienting attention to sound object representations. Psychological Research, 78(3), 439-452. Beck, J. (2012). \"The Generality Constraint and the Structure of Thought\". Mind, 121: 563600. Beck, J. (2017) \"Marking the perception–cognition boundary: The criterion of stimulusdependence\". Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 96(2): 319-334. Buehler, D. (2018a). \"A Dilemma for 'Selection-for-Action'\". Thought: A Journal of Philosophy, 7(2): 139-149. Buehler, D. (2018b). \"Flexible Occurent Control.\" Philosophical Studies. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-018-1118-3 Burge, T. (2010). Origins of Objectivity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Carrasco, M. (2011). ''Visual Attention: The Past 25 years\". Vision Research 51: 1484– 525. Chen, Z. & Cowan, N. (2009). \"How verbal memory loads consume attention\". Memory & Cognition, 37(6): 829–836. Chun, M., Golomb, J., and Turk-Browne, N. (2011). \"A taxonomy of external and internal attention\". Annual Review of Psychology, 62: 73–101. Cohen, J., Forman, S., Braver, T., Casey, J., Servan-Schreiber, D., & Noll, D. (1994). \"Activation of the prefrontal cortex in a nonspatial working memory task with functional MRI\". Human Brain Mapping, 1:293–304. Cohen, J., Perlstein, W., Braver T., Nystrom, L., Noll, D., Jonides, J., and Smith, E. (1997). \"Temporal dynamics of brain activation during a working memory task\". Nature, 386:604–608. Dennett, D. (1969). Content and consciousness. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Dobbs, A. and Rule, B. (1989). \"Adult age differences in working memory\". Psychology and Aging, 4:500– 503. 31 Fortney, M. (2019). \"The centre and periphery of conscious thought.\" Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25 (3-4): 112-136. Griffin, I,. and Nobre, A. (2003). \"Orienting attention to locations in internal representations\". Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15: 1176–1194. Higgins, J. & Johnson, M. (2009). \"The consequence of refreshing for access to nonselected items in young and older adults\". Memory & Cognition, 37(2):164–174. Irving, Z. (2016). Mind-wandering is unguided attention: accounting for the ''purposeful'' wanderer. Philosophical Studies, 173(2), 547–571. James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Jennings, C.D. (2012). \"The Subject of Attention\". Synthese, 189(3): 535-554. Jennings, C. D. & Nanay, B. (2016). \"Action without attention.\" Analysis, 76 (1): 29-36. Johnson, M., Reeder, J., Raye, C., and Mitchell, K. (2002). \"Second thoughts versus second looks: an age-related deficit in reflectively refreshing just-activated information\". Psychological Science, 13(1): 64–67. Johnson, M., Raye, C., Mitchell, K., Greene, J., Cunningham, W., and Sanislow, C. (2005). \"Using fMRI to investigate a component process of reflection: prefrontal correlates of refreshing a just-activated representation\". Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience. 5(3): 339–361. Johnson, M. R., Higgins, J., Norman, K., Sederberg, P., Smith, T., and Johnson, M. K. (2013). \"Foraging for thought: an inhibition of return-like effect resulting from directing attention within working memory\". Psychological Science, 24(7): 1104–1112. Lepsien, J., Griffin, I., Devlin, J., and Nobre, A. (2005). \"Directing spatial attention in mental representations: Interactions between attentional orienting and working-memory load\". NeuroImage, 26: 733–743. Makovski, T., Sussman, R., and Jiang, Y. (2008). \"Orienting attention in visual working memory reduces interference from memory probes\". Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 369–380 Matsukura, M., Luck, S., and Vecera, S. (2007). \"Attention effects during visual short-term memory maintenance: Protection or prioritization?\". Perception & Psychophysics, 69: 1422–1434. McElree, B. (2006). \"Accessing recent events\". In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation, Vol. 46. San Diego: Academic Press. Montero, B. (2019). \"Chess and the conscious mind: Why Dreyfus and McDowell got it wrong\". Mind and Language 34 (3):376-392. 32 Mole, C. (2011). Attention is Cognitive Unison: An Essay in Philosophical Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press. Mole, C. (2014). \"Attention to unseen objects\". Journal of Consciousness Studies, 21(11-12): 41-56. Raye, C., Johnson, M., Mitchell, K., Reeder, J., and Greene, E. (2002). \"Neuroimaging a single thought: dorsolateral PFC activity associated with refreshing just-activated information\". NeuroImage. 15(2):447–453. Rensink, R. (2014). \"Limits to the usability of iconic memory\". Frontiers in Psychology 5: 971. Shand, A. (1894). \"An analysis of attention\". Mind, 3(12): 339-473. Smith, E. and Jonides, J. (1997). \"Working memory: A view from neuroimaging\". Cognitive Psychology, 33:5–42. Smithies, D. (2011). \"Attention is Rational-Access Consciousness\". In Attention: Philosophical and Psychological Essays, edited by Christopher Mole, Declan Smithies, and Wayne Wu. New York: Oxford University Press. Taylor, H. (2015). \"Against Unifying Accounts of Attention\". Erkenntnis, 80(1): 39-56. Taylor, H. (2017). \"Attention, Psychology, and Pluralism\". British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 69 (4):935-956. Watzl, S. (2011a). \"Attention as structuring of the stream of consciousness\", in Mole, C., Smithies, D. & Wu, W. (Eds.) Attention: Philosophical and Psychological Essays, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Watzl, S. (2011b). \"The Nature of Attention\". Philosophy Compass 6(11), 842-853. Watzl, S. (2017). Structuring Mind. The Nature of Attention and How it Shapes Consciousness. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Wu, W. (2011a). \"Confronting Many-Many Problems: Attention and Agentive Control\". Nous 45(1), 50-76. Wu, W. (2011b). \"Attention as Selection for Action\". In Attention: Philosophical and Psychological Essays, edited by Christopher Mole, Declan Smithies, and Wayne Wu. New York: Oxford University Press. Wu, W. (2014). Attention. New York: Routledge. Wu, W. (2018). \"Structuring Mind: The Nature of Attention and How It Shapes Consciousness, by Sebastian Watzl\". Mind, 128, 511, 945–953."}
{"meta": {"title": "Unjust Honoris Causa", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/book", "creator": "Jokic, Aleksandar", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "This book offers a detailed account and analysis of the\n          academic scandal regarding the honorary doctorate\n          awarded to Professor Michael Walzer by Belgrade\n          University and the events that followed.", "date": "2011", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/JOKUHC", "language": "en", "datestamp": "2020-04-19T01:27:08Z"}, "text": "Aleksandar Jokić Milan Brdar Published by Freedom Activities Centre Dr Ilije Kolovića 12, Kragujevac, Serbia Editor in chief: Đorđe Savić Photography: Zoran Petrović Graphic design: Ivan Tanić Copyright 2011 by FREEDOM ACTIVITIES CENTRE All rights reserved by Aleksandar Jokić & Milan Brdar Kragujevac Belgrade 2011. Aleksandar Jokić / Milan Brdar\n\nFor our children: Nataša Andjelka Devon Nikola Mateia Zoé May they have every reason to maintain respect for academic integrity, dignity and freedom. 6 PREFACE ........................................................................... 9 INTRODUCTION............................................................ 11 Part One: ILECS Goes Rogue 1.1. A PROTEST AGAINST NATIONAL SELF-HUMILIATION......................................... 19 1.2. DEMAND FOR RESIGNATION........................ 27 Part Two: Disgrace of the Cruise Missile Intellectuals 2.1. DOWNFALL BY PHILOSOPHY........................ 33 2.2. CRUISE MISSILE CASUIST or How much longer will the Serbian \"Intellectual elite\" Continue to Spit into the Plate from which They are Eating............................................................. 45 2.3. UNIVERSITY IN THE POLITICAL BOUDOIR (The Chronology of a Disgrace as a Justification for Demanding the Irrevocable Resignation by the Rector of the Belgrade University)......................................... 57 TABLE OF CONTENTS 7 Part Three: Misguided Initiative 3.1. THE RECOMMENDATION FOR AWARDING THE HONORARY DOCTORATE OF THE BELGRADE UNIVERSITY ................................ 83 3.2. DIRTY MORALS AND CLEAN HANDS (Analysis of Political Science Faculty Recommendation)............................................. 89 3.3. PETITION TO THE THE SENATE OF BELGRADE UNIVERSITY .............................. 118 Part Four: Deception and Indifference 4.1. ANATOMY OF A DECEPTION ...................... 123 4.2. THE LAST WALTZ CALLED WALZER AT BELGRADE UNIVERSITY .............................. 127 4.3. EPILOGUE.......................................................... 138 Part Five: Special Supplement 5.1. JUST WAR THEORISTS OR JUST WAR CRIMINALS.......................................................\n\nPREFACE \"Honestly, I was really surprised.\" Michael Walzer, on being awarded an honorary doctorate from Belgrade University, on June 16, 2010. This book offers a detailed account and analysis of the academic scandal regarding the honorary doctorate awarded to Professor Michael Walzer by Belgrade University and the events that followed. We have devoted much attention to this episode not only because it is significant, but because the event has generated a great deal of writing, which now gathered in one place, can both provide the readers with a solid grasp of how this peculiar affair developed and offer an account of how our related views and arguments evolved. We are reproducing the entire material in the English translation in order for the international academic public to be in the position to be informed about this unprecedented honoris causa as far as the practice exists in general. The complete material is organized chronologically. Despite some unavoidable repetition, this approach, we think, will be most helpful to the readers seeking comprehensive understanding of the entire episode. Thus, as witnesses to some interesting times in Serbia, we present the complete story of this academic scandal – for which the main responsibility lies with the Serbian intellectual elites, those mandarins who are the subject of criticism in this book – to the European and world academic public, so that this scandal would not 10 remain yet another event tied solely to the domestic developments in Serbia and an affair of exclusively local significance. * * * The publication of this book gives us an opportunity to acknowledge an enduring debt to many of our teachers at Belgrade University where Brdar was a student from 1972–78, and Jokić in the period 1979-84. From this institution, we learned to follow the argument, to see that logic is sometimes cruel and that it may lead one to claims one doesn't always want to see as true. The integrity and demand for rigor as values were instilled in both our cases by our respective parents and extended families. This may seem excessive to some, but in our cases it made the collaboration on this book that much more easier. Brdar owes a great debt to his wife Dusica and his daughters Natasa and Andjelka for their sincere support in this fight for academic dignity and freedom. He is also indebted to Professor Jokić for his initiating the project of writing this book. Jokić wishes to acknowledge that a Faculty Enhancement Grant from Portland State University facilitated the early development of this book. He would like to thank Tiphaine Dickson for many conversations, discussions and argument reconsiderations about the peculiar set of facts this book deals with, as well as painstaking attention she gave to editing various versions of the text that is now in front of the readers. June 28, 2011. Aleksandar Jokić Milan Brdar 11 INTRODUCTION This introduction provides a brief chronology of the Walzer affair, a curious series of events that left Michael Walzer – a proponent not only of NATO bombings against then-Yugoslavia, but also of the military participation of land troops – and the wider academic community surprised. Surprised – and with respect the latter, arguably deceived – by what appears to have been a rushed decision to award an honorary doctorate to an American scholar (and public intellectual) without regard for the individual's lack of contribution or nexus to the academic concerns of Belgrade. It emerges that the University Senate, once forced to examine the question only because of the outcry expressed by the academic community, acknowledged that the Rectorate had been misled as to Walzer's bellicose stance towards the nation whose elite university had – as it was already a fait accompli – honored him. The historical narrative ends on an unsatisfying note: no action was taken to correct, in any manner whatsoever, the university's action that left it with a not unsubstantial quantity of egg on its face. This book incorporates formal appeals, protest and petitions with more detailed analysis and philosophical reflection on the Walzer affair. Let us em12 phasize that however important, and indeed critical, is our objection to Walzer's encouragement – pronounced gravely and urgently from the comfort of the ivory tower – to bomb Yugoslavia, we are as deeply concerned with the academic impropriety involved in awarding an honorary doctorate to someone who not only advocated and continues to justify the aggression against our state, but whose contributions to scholarship seem conveniently never to engage ideas at a level of philosophical abstraction nor genuinely engage facts on the ground with epistemic care. The academic shame would have been enough, but sadly, there was more, and tragically, it was our alma mater, and our intellectuals who invited this disgrace upon us. We hope that the reader can gain from our analysis a lesson in freedom and dignity. A Brief Chronology of Events • On June 12, 2010, we first learned from the media that an ILECS (International Law and Ethics Conference Series) conference would take place on the topic of \"Asymmetric Wars, International Relations, and Just War Theory\" in the Festival Hall of the Rectorate of Belgrade University on June 17-19, and that 14 foreign presenters were to participate, while a single scholar from our University had been invited. Of particular interest to the academic public are the following two details: first, three participants at the conference had advocated the bombing of Serbia in 1999 (Michael Walzer, David Luban, and Igor Primorac), and second, Michael Walzer was presented as a key guest who was to be awarded a doctorate honoris causa of Belgrade University. • Following this announcement in the press, we critically examined the conference and opposed the idea of awarding an honorary doctorate to Michael Walzer on the Atlantis radio show, broadcast by Radio Beograd. • Further to our remarks to the media, we drafted a Protest against the participation at the conference of people who had advocated the bombing of Serbia as well as the decision to award Michael Walzer an honorary doctorate. Our Protest was published on June 15th in the daily Pravda. Walzer was, in the end, and as planned (we shall endeavor to understand how this happened), awarded an honorary doctorate from Belgrade University – a decision he himself stated had surprised him, presumably given his publicly-held positions supporting the bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999, as well as his support for the secession of KosovoMetohija – and following this event, we sent a demand to the Rector of Belgrade University, Professor Branko Kovacevic, to submit his resignation as a result. • On the same day in the weekly Pecat, apropos the conference on \"Asymmetric Wars\" and the honorary doctorate given to Michael Walzer, we published a critical text titled \"Downfall by Philosophy,\" in which we showed the moral and academic collapse of the administration of Belgrade University for having awarded an honorary doctorate to a person who advocated the bombing and ground invasion against Serbia. • On June 20, we participated in another installment of the Atlantis show on Belgrade Radio, further articulating philosophical, political, and academic critiques to what we were now referring to as the Walzer affair. We demonstrated the historical significance – as well as precedents – for Belgrade University's stunning behavior. 13 • A subsequent critical commentary about the honorary doctorate given to Michael Walzer, criticizing the intellectual elite at Belgrade University – was published in the weekly Nedeljni Telegraf on July 23rd. The following day, we persisted, composing a summary commentary regarding the events concerning the honorary doctorate: from the opening of the conference on \"Asymmetric Wars,\" and the award ceremony in the Rectorate, to the Rector's explanations to the press on the matter, made on June 18th. • Our targeted and repeated public interventions ultimately had an effect on the academic community. On June 28th – not quite two weeks after Walzer received Serbia's highest academic honor – a group of university professors sent the University Senate a demand that the honorary doctorate be revoked. Over the course of the summer of 2010, over 250 professors, Ph.D.s, and assistants signed this demand. It became clear that expressions of discomfort – if not outright outrage – regarding the University's actions had begun to be heard. • As the affair gathered steam in the public, the weekly Svedok published the text of the Recommendation, originating from the Faculty of Political Sciences, that an honorary doctorate be awarded to Michael Walzer, as well as our accompanying analysis of this text, entitled \"Dirty Morals and Clean Hands.\" • On July 15, the Senate of Belgrade University established a Working Group of the Committee on University Honors, tasked with examining all the circumstances that led to awarding the honorary doctorate to Michael Walzer. It was to issue a report on its findings in September, 2010, upon return from the summer break.14 • On September 22nd, the Working Group of the Committee on University Honors concluded \"that the Faculty of Political Sciences has offered in its recommendation inaccurate and incomplete information, for it did not point out that Professor Walzer was calling for a land invasion of our country.\" This report was adopted by the Senate of Belgrade University on September 27th. Significant is the report's finding that the honorary doctorate was awarded on the basis of deception, and the recognition by the Senate acknowledges that it had committed an error. No action, however, was taken as a result. By the time of this Senate meeting, the above mentioned Petition of the university professors had already gathered 260 signatures. This was not deemed a sufficient reason for the Senate to take it into serious consideration at its meeting. * * * It is from this unsatisfying ending that we begin this collection of interventions and reflections. All we meant – and still intend – is to provoke the reader, wherever she may live, write, think or work, to consider carefully the freedom that we all possess and the dignity to which all are entitled in our highest academic institutions. Our critical words ought to be seen – even though they stray from our habitual scholarly pursuits – as a reflection of the degree to which we care about Belgrade University, and all the other \"Belgrade Universities,\" so that they may, if they are one day pressed to pass under the academic yoke, to think, and think carefully, before they sell their integrity to the lowest bidder, for a profit of nothing.\n\nPART ONE: ILECS GOES ROGUE\n\nA PROTEST AGAINST NATIONAL SELF-HUMILIATION June 14, 2010 We, the undersigned, protest in the strongest terms the inclusion of individuals hostile to the Serbian state and Serbian people as attendees of the conference on \"Asymmetric Wars, International Relations, and Just War Theory,\" scheduled for June 17-19, 2010, at Belgrade University as part of the \"International Law and Ethics Conference Series (ILECS)\" (originally founded in 1997 by Aleksandar Jokić, Portland State University – since 2004 no longer with the project – and Jovan Babic, Belgrade University), organized by a previously unknown Center for Ethics, Law, and Applied Philosophy, apparently operating at Belgrade University under the auspices of the Serbian Philosophical Society. We note the unusually narrow selection of participants at this conference – 14 foreign presenters and just one speaker from Serbia (Professor Jovan Babic, the remaining cofounder of ILECS and organizer of this conference) – despite the presumed relevance for Serbia of the themes to be addressed. Why exactly is this group of foreign scholars meeting in Belgrade at the state's expense? Are Serbian philosophers and social scientists lacking in competence to engage in a dialogue with them? Were our protest limited just to the way the speakers were selected it would have dealt 19 1.1 with a simple professional matter and the further evidence of a wider and currently dominant slavish Serbian attitude \"towards the world\" at large. At issue, however, is something much more important than a mere structure of a philosophical discussion among a bunch of foreigners. The vital reasons for this protest are the following: (1) The fact that among the invitees the organizers have integrated individuals that no self-respecting state would have welcomed at the highest academic level, given their known record of extreme hostility towards the host country and its people; and (2) The fact that one of them will be awarded honoris causa, which surely will remain an unparalleled event, given the laureate's actual total demerit for this particular honor. The first odious invitee is Michael Walzer (Princeton University) who despite having authored many widely cited books in the present context, is uniquely significant as a public intellectual who enthusiastically advocated in favor of the bombing of our country, Yugoslavia. He is mentioned first as half of the said conference will be devoted to him. The second is David Luban (Georgetown University) –who, driven by visible anti-Serbian political motives, zealously articulated the claim that Serbia had committed genocide in his pamphlet \"Timid Justice: The ICJ Should Have Been Harder on Serbia,\"1 in which he urged that the legal definition of genocide be modified so that the country he is currently visiting as a guest could be more easily convicted of the world's gravest − 20 1 http://www.slate.com/id/2160835 and most stigmatizing − criminal offense. Other ideologically colored writings such as \"Calling Genocide by its Rightful Name\"2 simply do not possess any serious analytical value. Luban, it should be noted, reviewed the first collection of essays based on ILECS 1997, published in the U.S.,3 reserving his sharpest criticism for his host, Jovan Babic (whose name – perhaps in a gesture of deliberate sloppiness – Luban consistently misspells as \"Bobic\" throughout the review), whose \"train of thought\" he writes, \"jumps the rails\" and whose claims, according to Luban, yield \"absurd consequences.\" Professor Babic takes charity and forgiveness to a whole new level, one perhaps best described as \"self-parody.\" The third is Igor Primorac − former Professor of Philosophy at Belgrade University, who since the early 1990s, after he emigrated, has been aggressively antiSerb, particularly in his claims of \"Serb Nazism\" and varied contributions to the genre about \"all Serb genocides\". He, too, was an enthusiast for all the bombings carried out against the Serbs throughout the 1990s. He did not even hesitate back then to designate his former colleagues at the Philosophy Faculty as \"the Nazis\" (while some of them will now reciprocate by welcoming him as organizers of this \"symposium\"). These are facts of some notoriety within the Serbian Philosophical Society and Faculty of Philosophy. It goes without saying that we are not protesting against the freedom of these individuals to think, 21 2 http://www.allbusiness.com/legal/4081615-1.html 3 The Philosophical Review, Vol. 111 (October 2002) no. 4, pp. 620-24. write, and publish whatever they might get away with, but something quite different. Inviting as your guests people who in 1992 or 1999 were encouraging fighter plane pilots to drop bombs on your head to smile in your face a decade later while you decorate them with highest academic honors, represents a mind-boggling self-abasement and cultural masochism. To this, all those who still have national dignity and self-respect must react. Those who are into this sort of self-deprecating thing can practice it in private, but it is unacceptable to do this as representatives of any national institution (be it the Center for Ethics, Law, and Applied Philosophy and Serbian Philosophical Society as organizers, the Ministry of Science as the funding agency for this kind of \"international cooperation,\" and the Rectorate of the Belgrade University, which gives the most formal tone to the whole affair). As one of us was a former President of the Serbian Philosophical Society – a national institution that in the past had always paid attention to national honor and dignity – and the other was a cofounder of ILECS – an annual conference conceived in the period of comprehensive sanctions against Yugoslavia as a way to contribute to the affirmation of our country and sciences in the Western world – we protest in the name of those colleagues who still value self-respect and honor of their country and who would no doubt condemn this endeavor were they fully informed about its nature. With this event ILECS has clearly been transfigured into its opposite: an institution of selfabasement and practically a new tribunal, as it were, for generating another wave of accusations against our country, this time even without having to use the22 proverbial stick but by way of \"applied philosophy\" that is tastelessly subordinated to ideological and political demands. We find it obvious that in a serious country individuals like those mentioned above, should anyone even bother to invite them for whatever reason, surely would stand no chance of being offered hospitality at the official level. Our protest has its ultimate and most significant rationale in the scandalous announcement that on June 16, 2010 at 11:00 am, Professor Michael Walzer will be ceremonially adorned with the honorary doctorate of Belgrade University! Does the University leadership know what they are doing and do they have any idea who they are honoring? Does the Rectorate of Belgrade University have an office of information that might have secured insight into who may really deserve to be celebrated at this highest level? The laureate has produced a number of textes engagés, and like many American authors, he has invested himself in the policies of his government while failing to deliver on his philosophical, logical thinking, or his argumentation. Relying on news from CNN and State Department releases, which is in itself beneath the level of proper scholarship, Walzer fails to recognize when his statements lack support, and his arguments fail. Let us demonstrate. If, on the one hand, he claims that humanitarian interventions are undoubtedly morally justified,4 and on the other, that \"there would be many fewer 23 4 \"Argument about Humanitarian Intervention\", Dissent, Winter 2002, http://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/?article=629 Kosovars alive in Kosovo today had Europe alone been making decisions there,\"5 then several claims are clearly implied by this (given the way the official narrative goes): 1) that the bombing of Serbia was justified, 2) because Serbia (was) a genocidal state, 3) that Europe is irresponsible and incompetent to solve problems in its own backyard, 4) that the aggression by the US and NATO against Yugoslavia was morally justified a) as a way to save face for Europe b) as halting of Serbian genocidal policies towards Kosovo and Metohija. Let us look at one more example. The esteemed political theorist formulates a tautology hardly worthy of a moderately talented student in philosophy: \"In the Kosovo case, if a NATO army had been in sight, so to speak, before the bombing of Serbia began, it is unlikely that the bombing would have been necessary.\"6 Consequently, had things been the way Madeleine Albright demanded in the Annex B of the Rambouillet \"agreement,\" there would have been no need for bombing. This comical tautology, however, conceals a more significant claim: Professor Walzer thus holds that the bombing of Serbia was justified, while unintentionally exposing the embarrassing logical conse24 5 Interview with Walzer in Imprints, Vol. 7 (2003), no. 1, http://jeffweintraub.blogspot.com/2003/08/michael-walzeron-justwars-politics_25.html 6 \"Argument about Humanitarian Intervention\", Dissent, Winter 2002, http:// www. dissentmagazine.org/article/?article=629 quence that it was precisely the actions by NATO that brought about the \"wave of refugees.\" Is it possible to find more explicit expressions of support for the bombing of Yugoslavia in academic circles, and Walzer has also regularly been slipping such claims into his many (quasi)scientific/(pseudo)philosophical texts meant for the middlebrow consumption. Given the questionable quality of argumentation, don't we here have a case of dazzling vulgarity by a big name, a malady clearly also suffered by those who misguidedly proposed Walzer for this high honor? For it is clear that this professor did not have an \"ambivalent\" attitude towards the bombing of Yugoslavia. Also, those who nominated him showed no ambivalence either when they considered him a contender for such high honor even though the laureate is an individual prepared to be politically invested even to the point of dishonoring his own profession. If this nomination is a result of ignorance, then this testifies to the superficiality and carelessness by the nominators; if, however, it was made intentionally, then we expect that in the explanation for honoring Walzer a full endorsement be given to his views on the justification for the bombing of our country, and that his \"war effort\" (and not just scholarly work) will be emphasized as important reasons for bestowing this award upon him. Whatever happens, this event will devastate the legacy and programmatic purpose of ILECS, and it is without parallel given the previous practices by the Serbian Philosophical Society, and Belgrade University. Finally, it is scandalous that this unprecedented event should provoke no reaction from our academic 25 and cultural public. Since in our view the protection of national dignity is a duty for all responsible people, rather than being an occasional fad that comes second to promoting one's career, with this protest we oppose this complicit numbness and the practice of masochistic-provincial adulation of \"big names\" from foreign lands, without as much as asking what they wrote – and often howled – about us during the nineties. Aleksandar Jokić and Milan Brdar [Daily Pravda, June 15, 2010] 26 BELGRADE UNIVERSITY Rectorate Studentski trg 1 RECTOR PROF. DR BRANKO KOVAČEVIĆ DEMAND FOR RESIGNATION Dear Honorable Mr. Rector, Regarding the honorary doctorate awarded to Professor Michael Walzer, we are demanding that you, as the most answerable individual at the University, submit at once your irrevocable resignation. It is entirely possible, Mr. Rector, that in this shameful affair you have been a victim of ignorance due to careless actions by those who conspired to nominate Professor Walzer for this high distinction. However, you did have at your disposal our protest of June 14, that should have given you a clear sense of the \"merits\" the honored professor, by now already a laureate, possessed. It is quite possible that our text was not waiting on your desk for you to read it even though we sent it to you electronically. We were in a hurry, because we, too, had learned rather late of this unprecedented machination in our academic history. The question of whether our text had reached you on time or not you should discuss with your staff. Irrespective of that, you could have heard about it from the media and press reports. Had you become aware of our protest the day before yesterday when we went public with it you 27 1.2 would have had ample time, even if it were just a couple of hours before the ceremony was scheduled to begin, to assert your authority and put an end to this mockery and impeach its primary actors. Had you aborted everything, shame would have been deserved only by the nominating party, and you would have merited only honor and glory. Any question about the accuracy of our claims regarding the laureate you could have settled in a matter of just hours. This should have been simplified by the fact that we have provided you with links to published statements indicative of the laureate's \"achievements\" meriting the honor bestowed upon him. Furthermore, we were at your disposal for any urgent meeting you might have wanted, something we did expect given that we are responsible members of the academic community, and not some anonymous whistleblowers. As individuals devoted to academic values and scientific standards, endowed with a still vivid sense of national honor and self-respect, we find with regret that you did not halt this academic calamity and seek to protect the esteemed institution you are directing. Consequently, for the sake of saving the reputation of the University, the rehabilitation of academic seriousness, as well as your personal honor, the only remaining option is to submit your irrevocable resignation. Resignation remains as the only honorable act in this situation. Your resignation is in the interest of protecting the reputation of the institution we should presumably all be serving. In case you fail to do so, you will only contribute to the further moral28 collapse of the University and amplify this dishonor, which will reinforce the feeling of academic defeat and national shame. Let us not forget, the institutions remain, we are the ones who depart, and history will remember us according to how we served them. U Beogradu, Prof. dr Milan Brdar June 18, 2010. Prof. dr Aleksandar Jokić\n\nPART TWO: DISGRACE OF THE CRUISE MISSILE INTELLECTUALS\n\nDOWNFALL BY PHILOSOPHY On the occasion of the bestowing an honorary doctorate at the University on June 16, 2010, and the international Conference at the Rectorate of the Belgrade University When, in the fall of 1915, the German military forces crossed the Danube and entered Belgrade from the North, all the cadets of Belgrade University, on their own initiative, lined up to salute Feldmarschall August von Mackensen. This unpleasant fact is kept well hidden in the adjusted works of history. What Mackensen's view of our cadets was we can only speculate indirectly, on the basis of the fact that he erected a monument to both his dead troops and the Serbian soldiers who died defending Belgrade. This suggests that self-humiliation can never lead to respect (even by one's occupier). INITIATIVE IS ALWAYS DESIRABLE Who could have expected that almost 95 yeas later, at the start of the 21st century and in a \"democracy,\" that Belgrade University would yet again bring \"its lustrous tradition, prestige, and independence\" to the brink of dishonor and scandal. Again thanks to the self-humiliation and subservient attitude towards the actual global oppressor, even when the latter has not demanded it. Initiative is always strongly desirable. 33 2.1 During the last ten years since the so-called \"democratic changes\" took hold in Serbia, the jobs that could not be undertaken before the bombing of 1999 are being steadily completed: destroying and humiliating the army – which by now has been accomplished; creating out of the police a traveling circus – for entertaining the populace on Sundays in the abandoned local playgrounds; colonizing the intellectual elite from within – using the media induced neurological surgery or brainwashing with narratives about democracy, rights, etc; relegating those who would resist into nonexistence, by passing over them in silence and ensuring that they are forgotten; and discrediting the remaining national institutions, by using local intellectuals (already in a vassal stance towards anything Western), who are thrilled to attack the Church, the state, the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, etc. A significant segment of the thus engaged intellectual elite is situated at the University. That they have a strong presence there and are well spread out, can be seen from the events that have marked the last two decades: whenever this state, its prestige, dignity and national self-respect had been put to test, the latter national academic institution failed to take action. Since the \"autonomy of the university\" has long been \"pierced\" by the political parties \"of pro-European orientation,\" there was no reaction from any freedomloving Faculty when we were being robbed of Kosovo and Metohija; when the scandalous resolution on Srebrenica was being enacted, similarly, no reaction. It is not necessary to enumerate much more in these pages. It would not be an exaggeration to conclude that the celebrated Belgrade University (with all its34 celebrated Faculties) is silent whenever it must stand up in defense of national dignity and self-respect. Does this mean that now we are witnessing a managed collapse from within of this national institution as well? We have reasons to pose this question precisely these days given the latest case of academic dishonor that involves several national institutions, including Belgrade University. In Belgrade on June 17-19, 2010, a conference on \"Asymmetric Wars, International Relations, and Just War Theory\" will take place in the Formal Hall of the Rectorate. The event is scandalous, first, because it convenes 14 participants from abroad and only one from Serbia. How did it happen that the Ministry of Science would fund such a lop-sided gathering, which testifies to the servile and vassal attitude towards the Western, particularly \"American science and philosophy\" (as most participants are from the US). If such is the case, then why isn't that powerful country also contributing to fund the event? Especially scandalous is the selection of conference participants, among whom are three proponents of the bombing of Serbia in 1999 (Michael Walzer, David Luban, and Igor Primorac). The first among them, a Princeton Professor, and the star of this year's conference, was awarded the honorary doctorate of Belgrade University last Wednesday. What exactly warrants this recognition? Intertwining оf Cultures аnd Bombing Walzer sets himself apart from at least hundreds of his contemporaries whose scholarly work might justify giving them such high recognition only by supporting \"humanitarian intervention\" and the bombing of Ser35 bia. Who can point to some other contribution of his to the \"intertwining of cultures,\" the American and Serbian, or to a \"collaboration\" between Serbian and American scholarship on any front that involves him, except for the agreement on the \"justified bombing\" of 1999? That there are a number of professors at Belgrade University who would concur with Walzer on this is nothing new. Some of them are, after all, among those who made the recommendation that he be awarded this high honor. Here we have a case when the very act of awarding a high honor serves to undermine it, and bring the University into disrepute. With just a few more such cases, Belgrade University would end up as a provincial dump that no one takes seriously. Considering that the consequences of such actions are tangible, the universal silence in the academic circles in Belgrade is startling. The conclusion is devastating: in moments of crisis, Belgrade University is incapable and unwilling to come to terms with the interests of the state – this, we are afraid, has been a public secret for some time. But the university is powerless to even engage in self-defense – which is being made transparently clear, at long last, to the point that it is revolting. Belgrade University is profoundly sick. In our \"Protest\" (Daily Pravda, 15. June, see here, sec. 1.1, pp. 19-26) we emphasized that in different capacities we had in the past participated in the said conference project (the full title of which is \"International Law and Ethics Conference Series\" or ILECS): one of the signatories of this text (Professor Brdar) took part as presenter and also contributed to the organizational effort for the first four years; the other,36 (Professor Jokić) was, together with Professor Babić, the founder and main organizer of these conferences until 2004. Since Professor Jokić withdrew from the project in 2004, it is necessary to explain how this came about, and to justify our reaction and response to the current conception for the 2010 conference. The Start of ILECS ILECS began with a pair of conferences on \"War Crimes and Collective Responsibility\" that took place at Belgrade University on June 21, 1997, and the University of California, Santa Barbara on November 14-16, 1997. The conference series, therefore, was begun (by Professor Jokić and Professor Babić) during a period of fierce, comprehensive sanctions against Yugoslavia, which included barriers for Serbian scholars to participate in international events. The idea, hence, was for ILECS to consist of a conference that would bring international scholars to Belgrade every June, with a follow up conference in the US in the fall of the same year, that would include some participants from Serbia. The main objective was to soften the blow of sanctions while respecting the law which might frustrate to some degree the \"civilized and democratic\" attempt by the Western powers to crush everything of value, including science and philosophy, in Yugoslavia. But there was another unofficial consideration why ILECS had to be created. In the early 1990s, with the first signs of the forthcoming dismantlement of Yugoslavia from without, one of us had the opportunity to scrutinize the role that foreign money was to play, infused into the country through \"nongovernmental\" 37 organizations such as Soros' \"Open Society\" or American quasi-independent bodies such USAID, and so forth. The goal was the ideological cooption of the Serbian intellectual elite that would, when the moment came (as it did in October 2000), facilitate from within the accomplishment of the goals of outside influence. With full awareness of the foreign funders' intent, funds for organizing ILECS events were, one might say brazenly, requested (through grant proposals) from precisely those organizations that sought to destabilize Yugoslavia the most. The calculation was that the more money goes to projects like ILECS – whose specific purpose was to engage in scholarly deliberation to uncover the ideological bases of the newly crafted \"globalist\" discourse for the sake of solidifying the US hegemony – the less would be spent on cooption. Between 1997 and 2004, ILECS had considered a number of topics7, including war crimes and collective wrongdoing, war and inter-ethnic reconciliation, 38 7 ILECS between 1997 and 2004 are as follows: 1997 – \"War Crimes: Moral and Legal Issues\" (Belgrade Univ., June 21, University of California at Santa Barbara, Nov. 14-16); 1998 – \"War, Collective Responsibility, and Inter-Ethnic Reconciliation\" (Belgrade Univ. June 26-28, Santa Barbara City Coll ege, Oct. 9-11); 1999 – \"Secession, Transitional Justice, and Reconciliation\" (The Belgrade conference was cancelled, the follow-up took place at the University of San Francisco, Oct. 29-31); 2000 – \"The Ethics of Humanitarian Intervention: Ways of Internationalizing of Internal Conflicts\" (Belgrade Univ. June 23-25, Portland State Univ. Oct. 13-15); 2001 – \"Institutionalization of Human Rights and Globalization\" (Belgrade Univ. June 15-17, Portland State Univ. Nov. 2-3.); 2002 – \"Religious and Political Toleration in the Age of Globalization\" (Belgrade 28-30, 2002; Portland State University, Nov. 1-2); 2003 – \"Collective Identity, Sovereignty, and Minority Rights\" (June 28-9 in Belgrade and projected follow up in Santa Barbara in January 2004); and 2004 – \"Kant and the Ethics of International Affairs,\" at Belgrade University June 30-July 1, 2004. secession and transitional justice, ethics of humanitarian intervention, institutionalization of human rights, religious and political toleration, collective identity, sovereignty, and minority rights. Many of the thematically arranged ILECS presentations were made available in Serbian in the Philosophical Yearbook, the journal of the Institute for Philosophy at the Faculty of Philosophy in Belgrade, and elsewhere in English8. Working themes for ILECS had always been carefully selected in order to consider the current globalist, ideological, and quasi-scientific contents configured in the West as support for US domination in the wake of the Cold War. There are indications that books and other publications based on ILECS events had, with time, inspired new scientific endeavors. The best examples are the two books critical of the conception and especially the practice of \"humanitarian intervention,\" which, when they were published in 2003, represented the only available treatment of the issue that wasn't entirely celebratory. That is no longer the case, and many now agree with the central message of 39 8 Attempts were made that the product of each year's meetings would result in a conference volume. The following is the list of ILECS publications: Aleksandar Jokić is the editor of War Crimes and Collective Wrongdoing (Blackwell Publishers, 2001), and two books based on ILECS conferences on humanitarian intervention: Ethics of Humanitarian Intervention (Broadview Press, 2003); and Lessons of Kosovo: The Dangers of Humanitarian Intervention (Broadview Press, 2003); also a special issue of Peace Review (Vol. 12. no. 1, March 2000, (with 14 articles) on \"Secession, Transitional Justice, and Reconciliation.\" The material from every year's conference is also published in Serbian translation each year in the journals Theoria or The Philosophical Yearbook (the former published by the Serbian Philosophical Society while the latter by the Philosophy Faculty at Belgrade University). most contributions included in those books that at stake is aggression, the supreme crime under international law. This is why it is paradoxical that this year, the 11th ILECS is devoted to the promotion and celebration of Michael Walzer, who is one of the authors most responsible for popularizing the tale of moral justification of illegal \"humanitarian interventions\" that must be incorporated within the reformed international law. Authentic and \"False\" Topics In 2004, Professor Jokić left ILECS because of disputed value of some proposed themes – specifically those dealing with the issues of terrorism and world state. The narratives about terrorism and world state (i.e., the end of sovereignty) are part of a discourse that the Western powers use to conceal their imperialist policies. These themes cannot compare in importance with the issue of \"humanitarian interventions,\" that served as the ideological basis for covering up the aggression against Yugoslavia, or the question of the philosophical underpinnings of international criminal law given the existence of an ad hoc tribunal of dubious legality in The Hague (the ICTY).9 Furthermore, the language of \"world state\" and \"global governance,\" rooted in specifically American writing about international law, is just the language of the powerful, prepared to sink enormous resources to back up its 40 9 Tiphaine Dickson and Aleksandar Jokic, \"See No Evil, Hear No Evil, Speak No Evil: The Unsightly Milosevic Case\", International Journal for the Semiotics of Law 19, (4), 2006: 356. policies, chief among them being the looting of the globe through imposition of neoliberal economics on the (once) developing world. After the split, Professor Babić continued to organize conferences (without ILECS follow-ups in the US); the Ministry of Sciences continued to provide its less than meager financial support; and the Serbian Philosophical Society continued to function as support agency (access to telephone, mail, and other small infrastructural assistance). However, from one year to the next, it became ever more apparent that the purpose of the project was shifting in an unexpected direction. First, the \"new ILECS\" appeared to neglect the idea of promoting Serbian experts in the Western scholarly contexts, then, it seemed to abandon ILEC's original (and crucial) programmatic conception that the indirect critique of anti-Serbian propaganda, one that had so deeply penetrated the Western academic endeavors, had to also be combated through academic means. Finally, what is striking in this latest or third phase is that Professor Babić invited the three said professors whose contribution to the defamation of the Serbian state in the Western public and among academic circles is considerable. The invitation to participate at ILECS 2010 was extended to one David Luban, who not only eagerly supported all kinds of accusations against Serbs and Serbia, but in a book review, unreservedly attacked the first collection of essays based on ILECS 1997. Negative book reviews are not a big deal, of course, but rarely are they composed without care for basic decency and a total lack of respect for the authors (even when they are non-Americans) with whom one disagrees. Visi41 bly angered by an analysis of the flawed conceptual foundation for the establishment of the ad hoc international tribunal in The Hague, Luban reserves his sharpest – albeit excessively primitive – criticism for the author of that analysis, now his host, Jovan Babić, whose \"train of thought,\" Luban writes, \"jumps the rails\". Is there a worst ad hominem than effectively calling someone you disagree with crazy? Professor Babić also issued an invitation to his former colleague Igor Primorac, who in the early 1990s had disparaged many including Babić himself for their alleged \"Serbian Nazism,\" which did not stop Babić, as editor for the publishing house \"Sluzbeni glasnik,\" from publishing and even promoting a book by Primorac a year ago. Also invited is Professor Michael Walzer, who would have made a perfectly respectable, decent, and more serious impression had he declined to accept the honorary doctorate with the justification that he \"refuses to be honored by a national institution that belongs to people who deserved to be bombed\". Can the revolting hypocrisy of all of this escape anyone? Evidently, it can. New \"Smart\" Tribunal If in our protest we raised the question about whether this conference would be yet another anti-Serbian tribunal (though philosophically \"enhanced\"), then this is not without justification. What else could be expected from these individuals in the context of would-be serious philosophical discussion? What serious person would even consider giving such people the opportunity to articulate their scholarly views right on the ter-42 ritory that was bombed in accordance to their wishes, and isn't it perverse, all things considered, to be underscoring their scholarly qualities, when they themselves were incapable of claiming their autonomy from politics? Finally, who would dare to contradict any of them, particularly Walzer, now already decorated with the highest university honor, if they decided by some chance to assert at the conference that the bombing of Serbia was \"morally justified\"? We, as participants at the past conferences, and Walzer (with Luban and Primorac) stand at exactly opposite positions. Ten years ago, Professor Babić was without a doubt with us. At any rate, he defended that position with his philosophical tools in a sovereign and brilliant way, which is what his current guest, Luban, could not forgive him. Who will offer a philosophical account of their position today, they can decide among themselves, but it is clear that their argumentation (even with help from Mr. Dr. Laureate) could fly only in a \"little NATO school of democracy\". As we have shown, ILECS, in its original conception, served the purpose of promoting our scholars and improving the image of Serbia by showing in a practical way that we do have talent capable of dialogue, on all themes of vital importance, with world renowned experts, and demonstrating that we can do it without a knife between our teeth (contrary to the cartoonish portrayal mind-numbingly repeated by CNN et al., upon which these distinguished guests appear to have formed the epistemic basis for their views on our nation, and what it deserves). Hence, it is reasonable to ask what purpose this radical redesign of the conference could serve now that it is premised on a peculiar 43 blend of hospitality and self-degradation. Could the purpose be the affirmation of American scholars here in Belgrade, at the expense of the Serbian state and with presence of local academics, reduced to the role of mere audience (who can serve coffee and mineral water to the esteemed speakers)? Or is the purpose personal affirmation of professor Babić and his aides with help from Walzer and other guests? Private hosting, however, is always morally impermissible and deserves to be strongly condemned if it is carried out at the expense of another, but particularly so if those other are public, national institutions. If, as the intellectual elite of this country, we are incapable of openly defending national dignity, interest, and selfrespect it behooves us morally to do nothing; it is morally preferable to do nothing than to initiate actions that will forever remain in the annals of national dishonor. Milan Brdar and Aleksandar Jokić [Weekly Pecat, no.119, Јune 18, 2010] 44 CRUISE MISSILE CASUIST OR HOW MUCH LONGER WILL THE SERBIAN \"INTELLECTUAL ELITE\" CONTINUE TO SPIT INTO THE PLATE FROM WHICH THEY ARE EATING? On June 16th, the latest honorary doctorate was awarded at Belgrade University: it was given to Michael Walzer, a well-known American professor, political theorist and philosopher, who, contrary to his reputation as a \"dissenter,\" earned over 40 years ago during the Vietnam War, has articulated positions close to those of the US government. Consistent with his almost four decadeslong \"critical\" support for the overwhelming majority of US foreign policy in the name of Just War theory, Walzer was a proponent of American intervention during the 1990s both against Bosnian Serbs, as well as for the bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999. This ceremony in all likelihood would have gone unnoticed had professors Milan Brdar and Aleksandar Jokić not alerted the wider public with their claim that at stake is an act of supreme national self-humiliation, consisting of Belgrade University rewarding a man who advocated that Americans shower our heads with their bombs, in the name of justice. Dr. Milan Brdar is full Professor, and scientific adviser at the Institute for Social Sciences and former President of the Serbian Philosophical Society, while Dr. Aleksandar Jokić is Professor of Philosophy at Portland State University in the US and is one of the 45 2.2 founders of the conference series Walzer is attending this week in Belgrade. The Faculty of Political Sciences that officially nominated Walzer for this highest honor, the Faculty of Philosophy that took part in the procedure, and Belgrade University have not reacted regarding this case and the protest it provoked. The Rector of Belgrade University, Professor Branko Kovacević, told journalists that he views Walzer as the greatest contemporary political theorist who now regrets having made the mistake of supporting the bombing of Serbia. Walzer himself, however, interviewed by Politika, stated: \"My view is that the intervention was justified and that Kosovo should remain independent.\" Professor Brdar emphasizes that their protest was not directed solely towards Walzer, but also against the domestic intellectual elite that awarded him this honor: – We do not deny the merit of Walzer as a scholar10 – says Brdar – nor do we deny him as the US citizen the right to promote his country, government, or even American imperialism. What scandalizes us is that many among our colleagues and a major part of the academic community do not defend the interests of their country, that they see their own state as foreign to them and a foreign one as supposedly theirs. We are puzzled as to why our so-called intellectual elite has for decades kept spitting in the plate from which they 46 10 That is how it was initially. But soon we realized that it was important to analyze the substance of Walzer's scholarly contributions as presented by those recommending him; that is, we engaged in an analysis of the text of the actual recommendation. See the discussion below. eat. This case is the culmination of the national selfhumiliation for which the sycophantic intellectual elite bears responsibility. Walzer himself has even acted honorably about all of this, for he candidly stated after the ceremony that made him honorary doctor of Belgrade University that he was surprised by the invitation he received from Serbia given that in 1999 he had been a supporter of and advocated in favor of the military intervention against our country. Professors Brdar and Jokić now demand the resignation of the Rector of Belgrade University, Professor Branko Kovacevic, as he failed to prevent the \"political farce\" of awarding the honorary doctorate to Michael Walzer. \"Resignation remains as the only honorable act in this situation. Your resignation is in the interest of protecting the reputation of the institution we should presumably all be serving. In case you fail to do so you will only contribute to the further moral collapse of the University and amplify this dishonor, which will reinforce the feeling of academic defeat and national shame. Let us not forget, the institutions remain; we are the ones who depart, and history will remember us according to how we served them,\" write professors Brdar and Jokić in their demand for Rector's resignation. When we asked Professor Brdar if he was amenable to a more detailed dialogue about \"the Walzer affair\" he accepted at once and immediately pointed out: – An unusual turn of events took place: as if by directive, the media made absolutely no mention that Michael Walzer was given an honorary doctorate. Perhaps this is because he stated, \"There will be no return of Kosovo,\" in his speech after he was awarded the doc47 torate by the university of the state the government of which officially insists, \"We shall not recognize Kosovo.\" What then does this mean, is the government going to recognize the independent Kosovo after all? It appears so, since it honors a professor who makes the same statements as the American Vice President Biden, and the American Ambassador: \"For us the issue of Kosovo has been solved.\" Professor Walzer says about himself that he is a public critical intellectual and leftist, yet at the same time he supports every American \"just war\". He claims to be supporting on principle the emergence of new states \"if that is the will of the majority,\" and illustrates his adherence to this principle with his support as an American Jew for the Palestinian state. At the same time he opposes Palestinian terrorism and supports all Israeli military interventions. Walzer spent his career as professor at Princeton University where part of the American political elite is educated and was among the top paid professors in all of the US. In his younger days, when he was building his career, he was a leftist at the time when in the US everyone who opposed the war in Vietnam was considered a leftist. However, with time, as in the cases of many of those early situational leftists, Walzer \"evolved\" and became an ideologue of conservatism (whether he would acknowledge it or not) and of American imperialism. Walzer gained worldwide recognition, particularly since becoming the \"state philosopher\" who justifies the so-called \"humanitarian interventions\" from Tanzania and Uganda via Bosnia and Serbia to Afghanistan and Iraq.48 Today Walzer openly admits that he had made mistakes in some cases claiming that he was mislead by faulty media reports about regions in crisis. Specifically, he states that he supported the bombing of Bosnia Serbs because he received information only from the press that published only negative reports against them. Today Walzer is honest enough to admit: \"I supported military interventions, but when I realized what we have done I admitted that I was mistaken.\" However, this pose contains the element of moral hypocrisy characteristic of the so-called \"responsible intellectual\". What is in it for some Serb, Afghani or an Iraqi when Walzer says: \"Ouch, I am so sorry, we messed up,\" referring to the Pentagon, his government, and himself? Is he offering a recipe to heal the wounds? Not at all! Does he lobby for the withdrawal from Afghanistan or Iraq? God forbid! Then what good is there in such \"honesty\"? Still, unlike apparently in the cases of Afghanistan and Iraq, Walzer seems to continue to hold that both the bombing of Bosnian Serbs, and later Serbia was essentially justified. He claims that the war of 1999 was \"illegal but legitimate\". That is correct, even today he does not claim to have made a mistake in supporting first the bombing of Bosnian Serbs and then Serbia, even though our Rector claims otherwise! All he said after the ceremony was that he recognizes how \"Serbs are now suffering in Kosovo and that they should be given help.\" One should not expect from him to admit mistake in our case since he functions exclusively as an advocate for his government, who regularly in his introductory 49 notes to every issue of his magazine Dissent promotes American imperialism and argues against the critics of the US foreign policies. How do you interpret his latest claim that in 1999 he was not advocating in favor of the bombing campaign but of a land invasion that, according to him, would have caused fewer casualties? As a rule, military land invasions are bloodier and produce much greater loss in human lives; thus such statements by Walzer demonstrate that he is yet to grasp this basic military fact, that he approaches these questions with superficiality, and that he is unserious and irresponsible. By championing insipid political claims, supposedly in the name of saving human lives, with that statement he had only provoked yet another scandal. What would have really happened had there been a land invasion: first, in short order, several thousands of American troops would have been killed, which would have provoked unrestrained reprisals – totally indiscriminate bombing that would have caused many more civilian deaths. In any event, the Americans in 1999 had already increasingly engaged in targeting civilian installations when they realized that their predictions that the war would last \"a few short days\" were not coming true. They quickly lost their nerve, and started retaliating while innocent civilians increasingly paid the price with their lives. Had the land invasion happened Americans (or NATO troops) would have been decimated, but the Serbian population would have fared much worse. That's why I claim that Walzer's approach is superficial and that he is even more irresponsible than one may think.50 On what basis did then Walzer deserve to become an honorary doctor of Belgrade University? There is no basis at all! The honorary doctorate is the highest honor a university can bestow on a foreigner, but when all is said and done for people from Belgrade University who nominated him it can be said that they are either irresponsible or superficial, and thus not serious. The honorary doctorate is not given just for scholarly work, which must be substantial and uncontroversial, but also for engagement outside of scholarship that must be positive first and foremost for the country that is awarding the honorary doctorate. And right before the award ceremony began, confusion erupted at the Rectorate, for it emerged that no one had verified Walzer's political engagement beyond his scholarship. Furthermore, the identity of the originator(s) of the recommendation remains a mystery to this day. Officially, the proposal came from the Faculty of Political Sciences (FPS), but since everyone insists on complete silence, it may emerge that a janitor had smuggled this document among the papers of the FPS Dean. Is it possible that the honorary doctorate is a consequence of a suggestion from the political milieu? I cannot speculate about that, as I don't have a single reliable indication that a political directive was issued. Something of a sort is possible, however, because of the frequent unsolicited initiatives coming from the proEuro-Atlantic circles at the University. It is a fact that in Serbia as well as in the world at large, the majority of engaged intellectuals side with the \"mainstream\" – that is, with the supreme power. Globally speaking that means being supportive of American neo-imperialism, 51 while domestically this implies supporting a government that functions according to US blessings. If need be even in conspiracy against the interests of the people. Already in the socialist time we learned that it is much easier to build a career when you go along with the ruling trend. One who is autonomous and critical must be prepared for isolation, which was characteristic of the socialist period, but it is especially applicable today. Even the situation with the media is similar: only a handful of opposition journalists wrote about the honorary doctorate while the regime media remained utterly silent. The daily Politika of June 19 stated that Walzer had become \"honorary member of the university (Literary Supplement, p. 2), while in the interview the paper published with Walzer there is no mention of the honorary doctorate. The same issue also published an interview with the Rector who could find no other topic than a critique of private universities, and who stayed quiet about the event involving Walzer. Clearly a directive was in place to publish nothing about the honor given to Walzer, as it became apparent that at stake was a major embarrassment, one that the government no longer wanted to participate in, or did not, at the very least, want it known. Why did then the academic community, the intellectuals from the university that enjoys its autonomy, acquiesce to this embarrassment? Our university is internally completely politically divided, so there can be no question of its real autonomy. At every faculty the political party to which one belongs is much more important than the quality one's scholarly work. Career-minded individuals find no difficulty in cooperating in this dishonor, that much more as they fer-52 vently promote pro-Americanism and neo-liberalism the same way they used to promote self-management (in the planned socialist economy). They want grants and visiting professorships abroad, and at home they want several paying positions; it is not enough for them to be professors, they want to be part of several directorates, to be members of governing boards, or program councils. Nothing new, we had plenty of similar experiences in the period of socialism. It cannot be said, however, that the majority of the academic community is like that, so why are those who are not moved by petty utilitarian goals quiet about all of this? I suspect that this is so because they experience the pressure of extortion and fear their colleagues, concerned that their careers might be stymied or that they could suffer unpleasant treatment if they speak up. That means that the university is run by politicized groups propped up by party supported cliques. Not unlike in the communist times, except that now several parties are the influential players. Don't you fear the consequences of your manifestation against the honorary doctorate given to Walzer? It is a sad circumstance that such a question makes sense. In the present case at issue is not a personal expectation or interest; when a critical moment comes, like now, a reaction is necessary to save one's face. And that face again is not something personal, but at stake is the honor of an institution like the University, national dignity, and collective self-respect. Otherwise we can expect a total downfall. If an honorary doctorate is given to Walzer, what do we have to look forward to; why not bestow similar honors to Henri-Levy, Finkielkraut, or Gluksman, who were the loudest advocates of leveling 53 Belgrade under bombs? We couldn't bypass Kuschner, Solana or even Clinton. Who could be against those awards after the case with Walzer? Is there a more dramatic illustration of the pathology suffered by the Serbian academic community? I am sure that Walzer will remember this honorary degree as just an exotic curiosity, while the University and the academic community have suffered a lasting dishonor. While our political elites celebrate and try to endear themselves to the \"great boss\" our intellectual elite appears incapable of anything more than to serve as an appendage to that sycophancy. It is no surprise then that they look for their salvation in the boring narrative about the concept of a nation as a \"dark relic of a bygone era,\" for then they have nothing to worry about. Between the American Army Helmet and the Chamber Pot Professor Brdar says that the political elite is required to take actions on the international political stage, in ways it must, but it is not alone responsible to defend national interests, dignity, and self-respect. The intellectual elite cannot constantly rely on the excuse that it will not deal with \"daily politics\" and instead focus just on the scholarly matters, for that will turn them into fachidiots, incapable of addressing anything else. The responsibility the intellectuals have is not restricted to the \"struggle for democracy,\" but it extends also to the defense of national interests and dignity of the people and state! Why would we claim that losing a game of football represents national humiliation, but not the act of awarding an honorary doctorate to Michael54 Walzer who advocated the bombing in 1999 that poisoned our country with depleted uranium now causing massive deaths due to cancer? What else should happen in order for the intellectual elite to raise its voice on behalf of its state, rather than continuously merely conversing about democracy and accession to the EU? The values of national dignity and self-respect aren't a matter of \"thinking differently,\" you either have them or you don't. If you have them you don't discuss them, if you don't have them no discussion will help you acquire them. When we pause to take a look at the logic of what they have been doing to us for the last decade, it is incorrect that they merely require of us to put the American military helmet on our heads in order to leave us alone. They are a bit more demanding; that is, they are demanding that we cover our heads with the chamber pot they have previously emptied on our heads. Translated into the ordinary vernacular, they demand that we voluntarily and enthusiastically join NATO, to forget that NATO dumped depleted uranium bombs on us and adopt it part of our own selves. To that end, the academic circles as a new domain of conquest have obviously being subjected to heavy-duty brainwashing, which finally led to this initial scandal we have been talking about. That only means that more scandals are coming. The Sycophantic Race for a Handful of Donations When in the fall of 1915 the German military forces crossed the Danube and entered Belgrade from the North, all the cadets of the Belgrade University on their 55 own initiative lined up to salute Feldmarschall August von Mackensen. Mackensen's view of our cadets can be speculated upon indirectly, in light of the fact that he erected a monument to both his dead troops and to the Serbian soldiers who died defending Belgrade. This suggests that self-humiliation can never lead to respect (even by one's occupier). Also in the period between the two world wars a part of the intellectual elite in their \"broadmindedness\" was on the side of Moscow, even though they, the fashionable leftists, had no idea what was going on there. Their leftist activities were exceedingly lucrative, thus Milovan Djilas, a failed student of philosophy, always had more money in his pockets than any of his professors. The situation is very similar today. Do you think that the pro-American and neoliberal positions are defended here on principle and out of appropriate idealism, while donations arrive from the US out of poignant human motives? Therein lies the secret of the sycophantic behavior of the Serbian intellectual elite towards the current bosses. Truth be told, nothing is openly demanded of them, for clearly they will deliver anything while competing in their adulation. This is why every criticism of American policies is immediately confronted head on, and they do it with more vigor than Americans would themselves. It is in the context of this race in sycophancy that the recommendation was made that Michael Walzer should be awarded the honoris causa. This race is still on, so we can expect new scandals. And it is not impossible that they should be worse than this one, which is of course without precedent. [Weekly Недељни телеграф, June 23, 2010, pp. 16-18.]56 UNIVERSITY IN THE POLITICAL BOUDOIR (The Chronology of a Disgrace as a Justification for Demanding the Irrevocable Resignation by the Rector of the Belgrade University) Introduction For the entire period during which the Western propaganda against Yugoslavia regarding Kosovo and Metohija went on unabated, Belgrade University was nowhere to be found. When Kosovo was taken away, the University – in the meantime schooled in banging on pans, pots, and lids in the name of the \"universalities\" (democracy, human rights, etc.) – said absolutely nothing. And now, for the last ten years, when a variety of players are visibly knitting a silk cord around our necks, while leaders are competing to be let in as accomplices, national institutions such as the Serbian Academy of Arts and Sciences, the University, and the Church are silent. There is nothing particularly surprising about this since those institutions have been subverted from within by mental midgets, ready to sell out the country and its future for the sake of a minor personal gain. The Church is busy dealing with itself since the death of His Holiness Patriarch Pavle, apparently at a loss to figure out where it is at or what its future holds; the Serbian Academy of Arts and Sciences has already famously proclaimed that it is \"not going to deal with daily politics\" at this time when the 57 2.3 house is on fire, while the occupation of the country is under way by the media invasion of the Serbian brain in order to remove the last vestiges of integrity and a sense of identity. The University with its smug and self-interested silence has surpassed them all. Suddenly, it spoke, and in speaking, produced an unspeakable scandal. Walzer, the theorist of \"just war\"! Yes. This largely medieval doctrine reemerged near the end of the Vietnam war, but was catapulted into useful prominence after the fall of the Berlin wall to serve as justification for American military interventions, or to put it more precisely: to justify aggressions by the American Empire in its conquest of ever greater portions of the globe. All those interventions are covered by two narratives: the first one is about democracy and human rights, while the second one is about just war, a story prepared for moral dilettantes who would believe it that the goal of those interventions is to liberate the \"citizens\" of attacked countries from the tyranny of their local leaders, and reduce their casualties. For example, we can take the Kosovo Albanians (and their armed wing, the KLA) who were armed and propelled into action by Washington. Then came concerns about victims and the mantra about the necessity to \"reduce the number of casualties\" emerging as justification for military intervention. And when, in the end, it turns out that the intervention, instead of decreasing casualties, had caused a hundred or a thousand times more victims, then all those vocal proponents of democracy, human rights, and just war are silent. All, except Walzer that is, who then proclaims: \"Oh, we made a58 mistake!\" This is supposed to be a virtue. Just what kind of virtue, we shall soon see. Act one: Monday, June 14, 2010 The crowning event of the scandalous decision to award honoris causa to Michael Walzer, who advocated the military aggression against Yugoslavia, was just one of the events that marked the third week of June 2010. The second act of this scandal occurred during the ceremony itself: first, fewer than fifteen people (if one does not count the officials and the ILECS conference participants) attended the event, second, the actual content of the speech by the laureate upon receiving the honor. The third act develops in the form of reactions to this event consisting of the disgraceful behavior by the media, on the one hand, and the statements by the Rector, on the other. We shall give careful attention to all of this in order to indicate with more precision to what degree the University and our academic community have been stuck in the political boudoir of the deteriorating world empire. Common to all these events or episodes is – scandal. The scandal of the academic community, the scandal involving the University as a national institution, the scandal of the pro-European media and journalistic profession that adopts a paternalistic attitude towards Serbia while itself clearly sinking in the depths of moral prostitution. The first episode of this national scandal was examined in our protest and we concluded with the Demand for an irrevocable resignation to the Rector. That this was quite justified is clear in particular from the second and third episodes of this whole affair. In the 59 second episode the Rector deserved to resign because he did nothing while in the third because he had issued an inexcusably inappropriate statement. Act Two: Wednesday, June 16 First Picture Let us first consider a photograph from the ceremony, published in only one newspaper (Pravda, 19-20 June 2010, p. 13, and 29 June, 2010 pp. 8-9). The Festival Hall of the Rectorate is practically empty. If we count out those who were present as a result of official duty, that is three or four journalists (including a cameraman), four conference participants, the Rector and certainly a few others from the Rectorate, at least 2 representatives from the nominating organization and Walzer himself with his spouse, it follows that no more than five or six people (assuming a few were left outside the camera angle) attended the ceremony. All in all, there was no audience! What sort of ceremony is this, with no academics present: the students and faculty? That all professors of Belgrade University received invitations is clear, and their absence is instructive! In that situation, wasn't it better to have moved the ceremony to the Rector's office that would have easily accommodated all those present, perhaps with the following excuse given to the laureate: \"You know, Mr. Walzer, last week's storm caused the roof right above the Festival Hall to cave in, so we must do it here...And for that reason we did not even invite our colleagues, you will understand.\"60 More than a meager attendance, hence, is that much more symptomatic, for like always on such occasions, invitations had gone to all faculties. Therefore, we might surmise, a quiet boycott took place. The academic community may not be as afflicted as it appeared, since en masse it steered clear of this degrading ceremony. Is the Rector aware of that? Second Picture: The Recommendation for Awarding the Honorary Doctorate In the Recommendation, we read that Michael Walzer's \"great contribution is to have shown that concrete problems of our time can be addressed with the apparatus of political theory and political philosophy.\" What? Is that the essence of the contribution made by \"the greatest living political thinker\"? Had somebody written this about a local colleague he would be ridiculed for decades. They made it sound as if the world had to wait for Walzer to reveal that the concepts of political theory and political philosophy can be applied to concrete problems. Isn't this indicative of the total intellectual impotence afflicting the authors of the Recommendation, as they struggled to formulate something impressive about their nominee? Third Picture: You Give me the Award I Give you Kosovo Not The third picture of this scandal consists of the ceremony that ends with the speech by the laureate in 61 which he \"gives thanks\" for the high honor bestowed upon him. First, the laureate is surprised with this gesture given in what country this is happening. Still, this did not prevent him from remaining faithful to his views, causing those who recommended him for this honor to ponder a bit what they have done. In his ceremonial speech he emphasized the following: 1) \"Kosovo is gone and there is no question of returning it to Serbia, negotiations are possible, but...\" and so on and on. In this, the laureate exposes himself as the spokesperson for the State Department and the Pentagon, which he is, in essence, via the electronic edition of his journal Dissent. However, those lingering among us who recommended him for the honorary doctorate fail to see this, and instead view him as a political philosopher, political theorist, and (allegedly) autonomous intellectual. Were they perhaps overwhelmed by the sense of shame when they heard him spit in the face of this country and its official policy (regarding Kosovo remaining a part of Serbia)? And does this country even have a face when the Rector fails to recognize that this is an insult for the academic community as well, when they are made to receive the message: \"You give me the honor, and I get to thank you by emphasizing that Kosovo is gone, finished.\" He also added something else, which demonstrates how little he cares for the logical consequences of his statements or his hosts: 2) \"I was in favor of a ground invasion, because there would have been fewer casualties.\"62 This is where the power of Walzer's mind as political theorist and philosopher shines through. Professor Walzer disgracefully falters and fails to realize what is immediately clear to any reasonably bright local person: of course, exactly the opposite would have transpired. Had NATO's army entered Serbia, most likely several thousands would have been quickly killed. Following that, one can imagine a counterfactual scenario wherein the humanitarian NATO bombing would have been transformed into a campaign of reprisals – a nonselective bombing as far as civilians are concerned, much like Dresden in 1944. And in any event, to a large extent the bombing already began resembling a reprisal campaign after the first week of hitting targets, when frustration set in as a result of Serbia refusing to capitulate as fast as the US imagined it would. As professor Walzer tends to be understood by members of his academic fan club, (see infra, p. 323), \"That's our good guys winning against Serbian bad guys for the sake of just cause.\" And now, after everything, he is pontificating to us that there would have been \"fewer casualties\". He appears not to know what he is talking about, or better to say does not care about the consequences of his words. In a nutshell, he is acting merely as a rock star. A Bit of Background History: the Autonomy of the University – from Party Committee to the Cabinet On Wednesday morning, the University Senate went into an unannounced emergency session to discuss the question: What is to be done? And, really, after 63 accepting a recommendation for the honorary doctorate that reads as if it came from the street, without checking who the potential laureate is and his characteristics, what could they do? With members of the Senate who proved hopelessly divided between those favoring cancellation of the ceremony and those in favor of awarding the doctorate despite everything, a call to the Cabinet was made, i.e., exactly \"where it should be\" in order for the issue to be resolved. Comrades to the rescue! And the directive arrived: proceed with the award, but the media must be silent! A senior functionary of the leading political party, a wellknown champion of democracy and autonomy of the university, made the ruling. This is a demonstration of the autonomy of the celebrated University that in the span of 50 years always confirmed itself from the committee to the cabinet: Party Committee + Cabinet = Autonomy of the University Will the virtuous academic community protest against this violation of autonomy? Will they demonstrate against the Rector who is certifiably incapable of making a decision on his own and demand responsibility? Of course they will not. Thus, one scandal follows another. And the media were really silent. The (in)famous newspaper of record, Politika, published an interview with Walzer with absolutely no mention that he was awarded an honorary doctorate. Was the editor seized with the pangs of guilty conscience, and embarrassed, try to salvage what he still could?64 Act Three: Thursday, June 17 Eloquent Ignorance and Eloquent Silence First Picture The day starts with a grotesque event. One of the organizers of the conference on \"Asymmetric Wars\" takes part in the Morning Show on RTS (Radio Television Serbia). His answer to the question as to whether Walzer was a proponent of bombing is that he favored similar interventions in Tanzania, and elsewhere. Thus, if in the name of humanitarian action, Africans are those who get killed, then there is no problem! Where exactly have philosophers wandered off with their humanitarianism? When the show's host insists that the question is about us (about bombing Serbia), the guest claims ignorance: \"I don't know, I did not read him on that.\" Accordingly, the guest is someone who took part in orchestrating Walzer's participation at the conference, but has no knowledge of the laureate's writings. Things are just getting better and better. Then he proceeded to explain \"the essence and purpose of the conference\" by stating that the desire is to contribute to ending all wars on the planet. Sadly, the guest sounds more like a contestant speaking in the Miss Universe pageant than a philosophical thinker or writer. Touching as the sentiment may be, how are we supposed to stop all wars? By dropping bombs while citing the approval of Walzer's just war theory? Let them dispatch their conclusions to the Pentagon, since the Pentagon is evidently the only military authority in the world engaged in \"just 65 wars,\" so that the said conclusions could be of no use to any other party on the planet. Second Picture Just as the entire day and evening the day before, on Thursday there was no news at all anywhere about the honorary doctorate. The conspiracy of silence among electronic and print media is without precedent. This speaks to the likely fact that the mere act of awarding this honorary degree was of great importance to someone, while its deeply dishonorable character is also evident. And so, the operation had to unfold in absolute silence. On Interrogating the Laureate as One's Justification: What is at Issue? The entire case turns on the issue as to whether professor Walzer really engaged in lobbying in favor of bombing of Yugoslavia or not. As if his own explicit statements are insufficient: Where you surprised when you received the invitation from Belgrade? – Honestly, I was really surprised. – Why? – Because I supported the NATO intervention to resolve the Kosovo crisis in 1999. I expected that it would have been very difficult that I should be given an award like this given my views about the solution to Kosovo crisis. For any intelligent person this is enough. For those others it is hopeless to repeat it hundreds of times.66 Furthermore, is Walzer really \"the greatest living philosopher\" or not? Let us emphasize that the latter question isn't really important, and at first we did not plan at all to engage with the question of his scholarly authority. But, forced by the stories meant to \"dazzle the naïve,\" we investigated a bit also that side of the laureate and discovered that his stature isn't as impressive as believed, and secondly, we indirectly ascertained that those who recommended him for this high honor never really familiarized themselves with their beloved theorist, whether as the alleged specialist in philosophy, or an activist (and if they did, then they are presumably in agreement with his views). Firstly, if he is really such a giant of philosophy, why did the official proposal to give him honoris causa not originate from the Philosophy Department at the Faculty of Philosophy? Who are those from the Faculty of Political Sciences who evaluated with competence the merits of his philosophical work, and would they please have the decency to make this public? How are we supposed to know this when the official Recommendation that originated at the Faculty for Political Sciences does not even display the signatures of its authors? Even if the assessment of the philosophical merit in this case were well founded, or in general that someone is an important scholar in his or her area of research, clearly that would be far from sufficient to warrant awarding them a honoris causa. Let us ignore the provincial phraseology. This high honor is never given simply on the basis of scholarship; more important is the nature and degree of engagement about issues of importance to the country. And Walzer offers absolutely none of the latter; quite to the contrary, when the nature of his en67 gagement that affects this country is taken into account he should be among the first on the list of those who neither should ever be considered for any kind of award nor be permitted to officially enter the country, including attending some benignly-autistic philosophy conference that is understood by no one anyway. We shall now deal directly with this issue of scholarly competence: the subject of analysis has to be the manner in which Walzer as a \"philosopher\" addresses the contemporary political issues, and to what extent philosophy helps him elevate his examinations above the level of daily Western journalistic chats on political themes, that is, how skillfully does he apply philosophical categories in entertaining the \"concrete problems of our time\" (which is one of the reasons he was awarded the honorary doctorate). In short, we shall demonstrate the manner in which an academic intellect via philosophy situates itself within the present day political boudoir for the sake of engaging in intellectual prostitution, in which activity much of our academic community enthusiastically participates (a topic we return to in two other contributions). Here is another example and demonstration: \"I supported our interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan, and then I realized we had made a mistake!\" [Quoted in Pravda, 16. 06. 2010; also in NIN, no. 3104, 24. June 2010, p. 41] What a display of honesty as a virtue! But never mind that those interventions made a pigsty out of a civilized state and cost hundreds of thousands of lives. Activists of Walzer's type had always with good intentions marched over dead bodies. And when they finally take notice of all the cadavers they cry: \"Oh, we made a mistake, but we must move forward!\" \"The68 greatest political philosopher\" and political theorist is incapable of predicting the consequences of what he advocates! If, however, he does have that capacity and still advocates what he does, then he is fundamentally irresponsible to the point of complete amorality. What is important, of course, is the media effect. Besides, the Third world only serves the purpose of confirming the splendid moral character of those Western activists decorated with doctoral titles and comfortably tucked away in the departments of prestigious universities. Then, from time to time, some sad characters from a far away place, like Serbia, fascinated by those \"big world\" players, and saddled by their own prejudice and ambition, arrange for a visit by some of them in order to venerate them and shower with high honors. And why? For nothing, we don't do this for them, but for our own sake! How much of a philosopher Walzer is in his works on humanitarian intervention, and war can be gathered from the language he frequently uses to start sentences: \"I think,\" \"It seems to me,\" ...\"We made a mistake,\" \"So they thought\". True, Descartes was a proponent of the proposition \"I think,\" but that does not mean that a philosopher is permitted to meditate without factual warrant. And Walzer has as a rule been doing just that: he deliberated the \"way it seemed to him\". And things seemed to him the way they were presented on CNN and other reliable information channels. When \"facts\" he had collected in this way, rather than through his own research, inevitably evaporate, all that remains to his texts is a meager logical matrix of his thought that proves insufficiently disciplined to be taken seriously, 69 too comfortable and unconstrained, often self-contradictory and totally lacking in awareness of its logical consequences. In other words, even in his alleged \"scholarly works,\" Walzer practices an activist, propagandist discourse whose significance is not based on argument, but on power alone. On the power of his state, that is, whose policies he continuously propagates, and which manages to bring to \"consensus\" all small countries powerless to oppose it, just as is the case of Serbia. Walzer is thus a big philosopher only in the shadow of that great imperial power. Otherwise, he could be of no interest even to a third rate university. Once the empire collapses, our laureate will suffer the same fate as many East European stars after the collapse of communism. Or, to use another example, consider the star of Jürgen Habermas (with his celebrated apology to the bombing of Yugoslavia). That is much like the fate of the silent movie heroes once films evolved to sound. Of course, stars shine more brightly when the firmament is dim. In place of grandeur, like in the previous cases, what will emerge is the obscurantist discourse with its wobbly logic and no factual corroboration, but also without the propagandistic value that captivated many in its philosophical and political-theoretic wrappings. This will become evident once the political boudoir in which Walzer and other activists keep philosophy and political science crumbles. That will be the end of one (and of course the start of another) process of moral prostitution. And as far as our academics are concerned they will already uncover a new worldly victim (that is a \"star\") to use for their own promotion, thus simulating their own participation in70 the latest trend. And they may go for it even if this were to require of them (the unthinkable): to become nationalists. Act Three: On Eloquent Silence and the Unspoken Message Finally, on June 18th, the Rector voices something in an interview to Politika, which never published a word about the honorary doctorate. But he does not speak of the big event, he evades it entirely by focusing on other things; that is, he is blithely whitewashing the honor given to Walzer and by doing what: gossiping about the private universities. Can one even believe this? There he is saying how private universities are just \"into making money and we are not.\" Thus, just two days after the ceremony, the Rector is attempting to cover up the scandal by slandering private universities, as if the state universities are just milk and honey. It is not just the Rector who does this, Politika, that virtuous, traditionally regime paper of record does it too, by following the Cabinet directive that no word be published about the scandal, which the paper consistently respected just as in the old days of living Titoism. In any event, we have shown elsewhere that Titoism rules Serbia thirty years after his death (see NIN, no. 3034, February 19, 2009, pp. 36-7). What is the point of feigning this never occurred, following a directive from the Cabinet and what is gained by this alleged deception of the readers? As if the scandal was not well known, and as if the academic community wasn't trembling as a result. Nothing of what was aimed at was accomplished; the 71 only thing uncovered was that the administration was also complicit in the shameful act that no good can come from. Uncovered was also that the authorities, together with the University, are prepared to engage in moral malice behind peoples' backs, serving no good whatsoever. And if we know that underhanded preparations are under way for joining the idyllic NATO community, then this action with Walzer's honoris causa also looks like such a preparation. Getting the academic community to become used to comradeship with NATO-propagandists is a step toward washing people's brains so that even a referendum with a positive outcome would in the end be possible – becoming a NATO member with the acquiescence that bombing was justified as a new universal truth. In contrast, the daily Pravda (June 19-20, 2010, p. 13) transmits the Rector's statement regarding the awarded honorary doctorate. The character of his statement is scandalous regarding its two parts and their contradictory meaning: Part one: \"Walzer repented.\" Part two: \"At the Faculty of Political Science public event students grilled Walzer.\" The Rector is oblivious to the contradiction he uttered and unaware of what he actually revealed. This is scandalous. Let us examine it. First part: If Walzer really repented why didn't he announce this personally? Or perhaps he has done so to the Rector, somehow on the fly while dining together after the ceremony? If that is what happened, then Walzer was not speaking the truth. And as a result the Rector stated a falsehood.72 Why does the Rector find it necessary to engage in this sort of deception? To cover for his own shame, and the shame of the institution he is leading, for awarding Walzer the honoris causa? There he reached for a justification: \"You see, Walzer repented!\" But when did he do that? Could it be that it happened after the ceremony, since as we have seen no sign of any repentance was discernable in his speech? He most certainly had not repented, which is clear from his interview of June 14, in Politika, where he states: \"I favored the attack on Serbia,\" meaning the 1999 US-led NATO bombing of Yugoslavia. Second part: If it were the case, as the Rector insists, that Walzer repented, why is he then emphasizing that the students at the Faculty of Political Sciences grilled Walzer in the way they questioned him? The rector appears satisfied with students' performance; he is ready to applaud them! Isn't this somewhat hostile, to be grilling a guest like that, and not just any guest, but a world-renowned philosopher? Isn't this interrogation of the \"greatest philosopher\" (as the Rector stated) by students a bit indecent? And if the student curiosity was not directed towards any issues in philosophy what could their energetic interrogation been about? Student curiosity was directed towards his political, non-philosophical writings and statements. If so, wasn't then the silence by the professors who were also present, to put it mildly, entirely scandalous? Messieurs et Mesdames professors are sitting quietly, evidently chastened, while students are left to carry out their professors' burden and save the face of their faculty (students come and go, professors stay). 73 If, however, this \"grilling\" was justified, as a way of clearing one's conscience, then things look even worse for the Rector. With this statement, the Rector in effect is attempting to rescue himself, the Rectorate, and the entire University over the backs of a handful of students, for, you see, \"they grilled Walzer\". They demonstrated to him what neither the Rector himself nor the numerous present professors \"who with great interest listened to the lecture by the laureate\" had the courage to do. Well, it is utterly morally repugnant to try to save the face of the disgraced University over the backs of a few students, just as it is immoral to attend to theoretical considerations in the midst of a moral and political scandal. No doubt there were many more students ready to grill Walzer, except that they could not have known that this was expected of them. Had they known they would have shown up in larger numbers to give their colleagues a hand. The Rector is bragging that the students told the laureate to his face what he and the University officials were incapable of saying. A perilous situation, is it not? Why did they then honor him in the first place, especially since Walzer himself was surprised by the gesture? Let us close the loop: If the grilling of Walzer by students had its justification, then why did the university officials bestow the high honor upon him? The Rector in his statement effectively admitted: We made a major mess, but the students cleaned up after us! Félicitations! It is over-the-top to ask of students to clean up after you! This, however, is nothing new. The University professorial establishment had pretty much always af-74 firmed its progressive character over the backs of students. Such was the case certainly in 1968, and before in 1966-7. It was easy then to stir up the students in order to lead them to the street, with crafty words and, yes, blackmail and threats (having to do with exams) all the while having only most wonderful words for \"our youth\". It was evident that the professors would show their true nature as allies: First when the time came to march on the streets to support their class interests, and not \"democracy\". This transpired in 1998 regarding the Law on Higher Education when only a handful of professors showed up while all others remained silent. Second, the professorial establishment demonstrates its true nature when they find themselves eye to eye with students who are defending their interests as students, and not implementing democracy in the state. The latter, unfortunately, can be witnessed on a daily basis on the hallways of the university buildings where professors issue threats and blackmail, and students prove unable to utilize to their advantage their highly touted and once-powerful student parliament to defend their interests. If the tale about the progressive nature of the University has any merit, then at stake is the progressive character of the students, and certainly not of the professors. It is a farce used for the sake of creating their own image by quack professors who showed up to salute the honoring of professor Walzer. Fil Rouge in Place of Act Four The common thread that is woven through these events is the conference on \"asymmetric wars\" that for 75 three days went on unabated in its autistic philosophizing. The organizers were true to themselves in their \"persistence\" so they did not \"see the light\" that is, they did not succumb to the \"demands from the street\". They were not discouraged in what they are doing despite the astonishment of the public, and in their fachidiotism, they resembled a bunch of moonwalkers in broad daylight. In their conviction that they were doing the right thing – making their contribution \"to ending all wars\" (as one of the spokesperson explained in a TV interview) – they proceeded with missionary zeal, and even expelled from the conference room a woman professor who in a par excellence moral act came to personally present them with her written protest against what they were doing. Thus they showed themselves to be great promoters of NATO's brand of democracy. Ordinary and Moral Prostitution: Similarities and Differences Moral prostitution is much more dangerous than the ordinary kind in the following ways: 1. Prostitution is a consensual transaction that may only harm the contracting parties. 2. Prostitution involves the provision of sexual service, understood to be pleasure. Prostitutes often feign satisfaction. Moral prostitution: 1. As a rule uses a moral persona as a cover, never proceeds openly, and thus is more dangerous; 2. Only the prostitute's political stance has any importance;76 3. Brings satisfaction to no one, except oneself; 4. Moral prostitutes may not simulate satisfaction, but instead resort to self-delusion. 5. If harm is caused, then it is not only to an individual but also to a group, institutions, or whole nations. Ordinary prostitution is paid work, with its own professional ethics; moral prostitution may be paid, with an expectation of a reward in the future or it may be unpaid (\"self-initiated\") in the expectation of a nonmaterial gain – in all cases without ethical constraints, only with a skeletal Machiavellian ethical form. An ordinary prostitute uses his or her body as her primary means of operation; the moral prostitute mainly operates using his (her) mind – and places in danger a much larger group of people around him (her). Both kinds of prostitution are a matter of personal choice or decision, but while the ordinary prostitute does it with her own self (i.e., with her own body as a means of production) the moral prostitute instrumentalizes all those around him (except his own body): morality, tradition, culture, the state, people, the University and other institutions – everything that is at his (her) hand. Consider the following: in the period between two world wars, Karl Schmidt was a great German political philosopher. In his time, Walzer at best could serve to carry around his inkstand and hold his coat. For a period of time Schmidt was a sympathizer and member of the National-socialist party. For this reason, all Marxists, including our own, have beleaguered him for decades. 77 Now imagine that a group of professors at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1955 decided to invite Schmidt in order to award him a honoris causa, and of course to provide him an opportunity \"to get to know Jewish people so he would repent\". That Schmidt would never have entered the country, that much is evident. That those professors would have been instantly fired, that much is just as obvious. But why are we so superficial and irresponsible when our own interests are at stake? Well, that is clear too. Because we have the intellectual elite we do, which, using the logic of weakness, invites types like Walzer, those proponents of bombing and the landgrab of Kosovo and Metohija, in order to reward him and offer him an opportunity to get to know Serbia and become a \"Serbian friend\". This would be funny were it not so humiliating. In any event, that is just an excuse, they could not care less for the Serbian people, the University, or the state; they only think about themselves and acquired petty stipends for (otherwise futile) stays abroad. In the end, professor Walzer will forget both them and us even before he arrives back home, and we will continue talking about him all the while dealing with just ourselves. That is the outcome of this deplorable and shameful action of moral prostitution. June 24, 2010. Milan Brdar [Unpublished] 78 PART THREE: MISGUIDED INITIATIVE\n\nIn the following segment we provide the text of the recommendation from the Faculty of Political Sciences for awarding an honorary doctorate, immediately followed by a detailed critical analysis of that text. In the first phase of our protest we have not questioned the scholarly character of Walzer's biography, but we let it be understood that from that point of view the proposal that originated from the FPS was uncontroversial. However, the reactions coming from that Faculty and remarks about our protest as well the commentary given to the press, led us to explore and critically examine the scholarly merit, first in the text of the Recommendation by FPS, and then of the work of Professor Walzer. At issue in the first instance are, of course, the theory of just war and his elaboration of the so-called humanitarian interventions. Those analyses make up the rest of this book, and we note that those texts have previously been published either in the daily papers or scholarly journals.\n\nTHE RECOMMENDATION FOR AWARDING THE HONORARY DOCTORATE OF THE BELGRADE UNIVERSITY On the occasion of his participation at the ILECS conference and visit to the Faculty of Political Sciences at the Belgrade University, it is recommended to the Instructional-Scientific Council and the University Senate that Professor Michael Walzer be awarded the title Doctor Honoris Causa, honorary doctor. Michael Walzer is Professor emeritus at the prestigious Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, USA. Professor Walzer is one of the most influential living political philosophers and activist critical intellectuals. He has wide ranging interests and has written about a wide variety of topics: economic justice and the welfare state, toleration, political obligation, revolutions, just and unjust war, political radicalism, nationalism, etc. Besides academic work he is well known for his intellectual activism and leftist orientation. His name is on the list of one hundred most influential world intellectuals voted for by the readers of the journal Foreign Affairs and the British Prospect Magazine. Michael Walzer was born in 1935. In 1956, he graduated from Brandeis University with a B.A. in History. He then studied at the University of Cambridge (1956– 83 3.1 1957) and Harvard. He completed his doctoral work at Harvard, earning his Ph.D. in Government in 1961. Walzer was first employed as a professor in (19611966) by Princeton University, Harvard (1966-1980), and since 1980 he has been a Permanent Faculty Member in the School of Social Science at the IAS. At Harvard, Walzer taught a celebrated semester-long course with Robert Nozick in 1971 called \"Capitalism and Socialism\". The course was a debate between the two about their views on social justice. He taught at universities around the world and he is member of the Board of Heidelberg University. He is a long-term editor of the journal Dissent, and editorial member of Philosophy and Public Affairs, Political Theory, and The New Republic. Professor Walzer is the recipient of prestigious international awards, including Spinoza Lens, a bi-annual prize for ethics in The Netherlands, and the German Dr.-Leopold-Lucas prize. To date, he has written 27 books and published over 300 articles. Among the most noted are Just and Unjust Wars (1977), Spheres of Justice (1983), Interpretation and Social Criticism (1987), On Toleration (1997), Arguing About War (2004). Professor Walzer was one of the editors of the big edition of The Jewish Political Tradition. His books (about 15 translated titles) are translated in more than twenty languages. His books translated into Serbian are Spheres of Justice and What It Means to Be an American. The secondary literature includes more than a thousand titles, and a great number of distinguished journals in political theory including Ethics and International Affairs, Polity, Philosophy and Social Criticism have published thematic issues about his works.84 The position of Michael Walzer has been differently described. Usually as a communitarian, but also as radical democratic, social-democratic or liberal. The reason for that clearly is the originality and multi layered character of his works that resist simplistic classification and labeling. The reason why Walzer, along with Michael Sandel, Charles Taylor, and Alasdair MacIntyre, is identified as one of the leading proponents of communitarianism is because he believes that political theory must be grounded in the traditions and culture of particular societies. For this reason one should be careful regarding interventionist policies and accept a degree of cultural relativism. However, Walzer also accepts that a certain minimal non-relativist moral core valid for all societies must exist, and that it includes prohibitions of slavery, genocide, and serious crimes committed by the state. For this reason Walzer's solution is atypical for the communitarian authors, it recognizes political and cultural specificities and the preservation of state sovereignty as the best means for protecting small and less powerful states from imperial policies, but it demands minimal respect of human rights as the condition for the recognition of the right to self determination of communities. Because of the importance he gives to the right of self-determination many have considered his theory to be radically democratic. Walzer's most important intellectual contributions include his theory of \"complex equality,\" and revital85 ization of just war theory. The theory of \"complex equality,\" he presented in the book Spheres of Justice as a response to the celebrated A Theory of Justice by Rawls holds that the metric of just equality is not some single material or moral good, but rather that egalitarian justice demands that each good be distributed according to its social meaning, and that no good (like money or political power) be allowed to dominate or distort the distribution of goods in other spheres; and an argument that justice is primarily a moral standard within particular nations and societies, not one that can be developed in a universalized abstraction. This book presents one of three most influential theories of justice in the last decades of the twentieth century. Professor Walzer is also credited with compelling revitalization of just war theory that was abandoned in the name humanitarian law and the theory of humanitarian intervention. He believes that it is necessary to weigh both the reasons for waging war and the way it is conducted, and not only the means used by the warring parties. Principal rules are the rule of proportionality and absolute noncombatant immunity from war. His theory insists on the importance of ethics in wartime while eschewing pacifism as an untenable position. Hence his ambivalent attitude towards NATO intervention in Serbia and sharp opposition to wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. He was in the group of 58 intellectuals who signed the Manifesto against war campaigns of the US President George Bush in the wake of terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.86 His academic and public engagement Professor Walzer directs towards spreading the idea of social justice, democracy, and the establishment of a tolerant regime of international regime. His great contribution is to have shown that the concrete problems of our time can be addressed with the apparatus of political theory and political philosophy that used to be considered abstract disciplines removed from political reality. What is necessary in order to gain an adequate understanding and appraisal of the political conditions in the world of today is a complex theoretical mechanism and careful assessment or arguments and counterarguments without moral arrogance and self-confidence that leads to a simplified black and white picture of the world. Decades long editing of the journal Dissent which fosters a leftist and anti-imperialist orientation testifies to such an attempt. An attempt, strongly inspired by the ideals of justice and international tolerance, to actively influence in a theoretically demanding way the practical politics. It is a promotion of the culture of dialogue, which distinguishes violence and dominance from an exchange of arguments. As a leading political philosopher of today, Professor Walzer will on June 17 open the international conference on international law and ethics, The International Law and Ethics Conference Series (ILECS). These conferences have since 1996 attracted leading moral, legal, and political philosophers in the organization by Professor Jovan Babić and Dr. Petar Bojanić with support from Serbian Philosophical so87 ciety and the department of Philosophy at the Faculty of Philosophy. On this occasion, translations into Serbian of two books by Michael Walzer will be published (Just and Unjust Wars, published by Sluzbeni Glasnik, and Politics and Philosophy published by Albatros Plus) and Professor Walzer will give a lecture at the Faculty of Political Sciences, as part of the graduate course on \"Theories of Justice\". At the Faculty of Political Sciences several graduating theses were written dealing with Walzer's theory of justice, and a number of Master and Ph.D. dissertations have been devoted to his contributions to political philosophy of communitarianism. Walzer's theory about spheres of justice is studied in several courses at the Faculty of Political Sciences (\"The History of Political Theories,\" \"Theories of Justice,\" and \"The Politics of Resistance and Civil Disobedience\"). We believe that recognizing Michael Walzer by giving him the honorary doctorate would contribute to the affirmation of the university in the world and would be an incentive for international cooperation. – No signatures by authors – In Belgrade, March 29, 2010 88 DIRTY MORALS AND CLEAN HANDS (Analysis of Political Science Faculty Recommendation) In our Protest of June 14, 2010 (see, infra, sec. 1.1, pp. 1926) regarding the honorary doctorate awarded to the American Professor Michael Walzer and in our other reactions with respect to this affair, we have not considered the matters of competence and expertise of either the laureate or the nominating party. Recent developments and particularly the reactions by the official nominating organization, the Faculty of Political Sciences, compel us to also take these aspects into consideration. This is what we are undertaking in this text by critically examining the contents of the official Recommendation submitted by this Faculty that offers the explanation of why Walzer merits such an important recognition. In what follows, we focus on the quality, factual underpinnings, and scholarly value of the argumentation contained in the Recommendation. The original text of the Recommendation is reproduced in the italics and it is \"interrupted\" by our analytical commentaries. We end with a general conclusion. THE RECOMMENDATION FOR AWARDING THE HONORARY DOCTORATE OF BELGRADE UNIVERSITY On the occasion of his participation at the ILECS conference 89 3.2 Could this really be a legitimate reason? In our Protest of June 14th we pointed out that the conference itself is problematic. In our text from Pecat of June 18th [see above, pp. 33, et passim] we explained to what extent Walzer and ILECS (in its original conception) are incompatible. However, none of this is known to those making the recommendation, as they had never taken part in the conference nor could they then recognize the discontinuity in the nature of ILECS that emerged. and visit to the Faculty of Political Sciences at the Belgrade University, it is recommended to the Instructional-Scientific Council and the University Senate that professor Michael Walzer be awarded the title Doctor Honoris Causa, honorary doctor. The text of this Recommendation, as we can see, was adopted by the Instructional-Scientific Council of the Faculty of Political Sciences, which gave it credibility so the University Senate could receive it on good faith. We shall soon see how much consideration the recommending party from the Faculty of Political Sciences gave to this trust. Michael Walzer is Professor emeritus at the prestigious Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, USA. Professor of what exactly? Why is this information is omitted? What did he teach before becoming emeritus? Is this not mentioned because he lacks a specific specialization or is it due to some other \"unpleasant\" facts? Why is the mentioned Institute \"prestigious\"? Is it because it is part of the prestigious university, Princeton University? That wouldn't necessarily follow. Such institutes exist at all universities in the US, and this one isn't particularly significant for the research that90 goes on there. The Institute was initially conceived as a sanctuary for scientists who on the eve of WWII, were escaping from Hitler's Germany, but were not considered suitable by mandarin academia to work with students because they had socialist or communist leanings. Anti-Semitism was still a shameful reality in universities as well. Along with Albert Einstein, the Institute welcomed Johann von Neumann, Kurt Gödel, Paul Dirac, Edward Vitel, Robert Oppenheimer, and others; a colorful crowd on the spectrum from physics and mathematics to philosophy and arts. It was because of these great minds – trained in the very scientific tradition that we will not accept to see demeaned at the University of Belgrade – that the institute acquired its prestige: from these brilliant exiles, targeted for death at home, and viewed with a shameful suspicion in their new land. Professor Walzer is one of the most influential living political philosophers Here comes a \"pleasant fact\"! But where did the authors of the Recommendation get the idea that Walzer is a philosopher, when he isn't a philosopher even by profession? This is also in contradiction with the text below where it is stated that he obtained a degree in political science (which is also false since his Ph.D. is in Government, and before that he received a BA in History). And if he is a philosopher, why isn't the Philosophy Faculty recommending him? Should we ask colleagues from there if they would recommend \"the greatest living philosopher\"? Of course they would, but this most certainly would not be Walzer. And if, for example, Richard Falk were to come to attend ILECS (he had, in fact, ex91 pressed the desire to attend the Belgrade sessions, but due to scheduling conflicts, provided written contributions instead) should he, as a leading theoretician of international relations, be recommended for honoris causa by the Philosophy Faculty? Why was it necessary for the Faculty of Political Sciences to dress up a political theorist as a philosopher? Even Walzer's Wikipedia page states that his most important contribution is to \"communitarianism\" in political theory, and political theory in the US, as it is the case here in Serbia, is not philosophy but is studied in political science, government studies, or public administration and policy schools. and activist critical intellectuals Now, what would that be? And what would a university have to do with it? A critical intellectual, if it is someone who has thinking as a \"general vocation,\" has an opinion about everything and writes about it – what sort of importance could that have from the perspective of a criterion for awarding such a high recognition by Belgrade University? How was it that this critical intellectual was selected and not another who would actually have made a contribution to cultural connections between his country and Serbia? What important thing did he criticize in order to be nominated, and is it important that it be significant also for this country and its highest academic institution? We shall see that no such thing exists – nothing, but this is of no concern to the recommending party. In connection to the program of the critical intellectual as a thinker of \"general vocation\" it is further stated: He has wide ranging interests and has written about a wide variety of topics: economic justice and the welfare92 state, toleration, political obligation, revolutions, just and unjust war, political radicalism, nationalism, etc. This is taken from his Wikipedia page and could indicate that he is not a first class author. The latter type of author focuses on a single area and works at it for years. And the issue of the criterion emerges: Why should Walzer's apparent indiscriminate writing practices be anything positive from the perspective of the Belgrade University? Could it be that he in fact is not a new Renaissance man, but perhaps just a glorified academic jack-of-all-trades and master of none? In any event, it means little whether this reflects legitimate eclecticism or hyperactivity. What matters is again the lack of connection to the purposes and academic goals of Belgrade University. Besides academic work he is well known for his intellectual activism and leftist orientation. Mystifications continue. This statement is meaningless unless a distinction is made between the understandings of the left here (in Serbia) and in the US. First, have we not left behind the (communist) times when leftist orientation was the crucial argument for having an academic career? What significance does that have today from the perspective of Belgrade University, and does this mean that the quality of his research is better if he is a leftist? Besides, what could the emphasis on the leftist orientation really mean when it is made by a Faculty that used to be a bastion of socialist self-management, and after the structural change (in the time of \"democracy\") has been known for years now as a domestic bastion of neoliberalism? And while they would look at a local leftist only with resentment and ridicule, 93 they appear ready to fawning in front of a foreign one, a Western at that. In the farcical fusion of these two attitudes we end up with a recommendation by a Faculty at the University of Belgrade promoting an impenitent proponent of neoliberal imperialism while for domestic purposes they are masking him as a leftist. Clever it is, perhaps. But also deceptive! But what does leftist orientation mean in the US? (That it is something entirely different over there: see in Neil Jumonville, Critical Crossing, Berkeley, Univ. of California Press, 1990.) If leftist orientation in a minimalist sense demands opposition to imperialism, then Walzer is a right-winger par excellence, for he supported every war that was started by a democratic administration in the US and every Israeli war. What sort of leftist is one who supports \"democratic\" wars (those waged by the Democratic party in the US) for the sake of spreading the power of American corporations? In addition, Walzer's is an endowed professorship, one established by a global corporation, the UPS. If that fails to strike us as very leftist we should be forgiven (and we should know, we were both raised in a communist country). However, should we leave aside the above characterization as inaccurate or meaningless, the question of the criterion appears again: Why should that be important or positive from the point of view of the Belgrade University? His name is on the list of one hundred most influential world intellectuals voted for by the readers of the journal Foreign Affairs and the British Prospect Magazine. Did those readers vote for this list or did they vote for the intellectuals whose name will appear on it?94 Sloppy formulations like this and silly praises of this kind are incompatible with prose by responsible scholars who are serious about the task of justifying a recommendation that a foreign colleague of theirs should be recognized with a honoris causa. What is, after all, the scientific reputation of these two publications so that opinions of their readers would hold any significance for Belgrade University? Foreign Affairs is a publication of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR). This is a private club formed in New York in 1921 with the purpose of promoting \"understanding of foreign policy and America's role in the world\". (By deploying activist intellectuals like Walzer the promotion of CFR propaganda – or in their terminology \"understanding\" –goes quite smoothly.) Carroll Quigley, Professor of History at Georgetown University, stated, \"The Council of Foreign Relations is the American Branch of a society which originated in England and believes national boundaries should be obliterated and one-world rule established\".11 CFR is one of three most influential organizations in the West, founded and financed by David Rockefeller. Now, who are those \"readers\" referred to in the Recommendation and why exactly are they, the so-called CFRians, relevant for any academic institution, such as Belgrade University? As for the Prospect Magazine, it is an unserious publication when assessed from any academic standard: It is broadly centre-left and pro-European, but perhaps its strongest leaning is \"contrarian\" – it devotes much space to articles debunking the \"popular wisdom,\" on topics 95 11 See, Tragedy & Hope: A History of the World in Our Time, G. S. G. & Associates, Inc., 1975. from economics to political terrorism. Hence, it is a publication without any recognizable academic merit in order to be of any importance to Belgrade University. Michael Walzer was born in 1935. In 1956 he graduated from Brandeis University with a B.A. in History. He then studied at the University of Cambridge (1956– 1957) and Harvard. He completed his doctoral work at Harvard, earning his Ph. D. in Government in 1961. Consequently, Walzer neither studied philosophy as an undergraduate nor was he trained in philosophy in his doctoral work; he is untutored in philosophy. The claim in the Recommendation that this is the \"greatest political philosopher\" is that much more surprising since Walzer, as political scientist, is only known as a \"professor of social sciences\" at the Institute for Advanced Studies. That he never graduated in Philosophy would not be of crucial importance had he shown in his work a philosophical nerve. However, Walzer himself acknowledges that philosophical writing about politics was not something he could successfully do, for, as he put it, philosophical \"thought experiments\" get on his nerves. And this can only mean that he has no understanding of the essence of philosophical thinking and argumentation. Here is the offending quote: \"But I did make an effort to write about politics in a more philosophical way. I don't think that I ever managed real philosophy. I couldn't breathe easily at the high level of abstraction that philosophy seemed to require, where my friends in the group were entirely comfortable. And I quickly got impatient with the playful extension of hypothetical cases, moving farther and farther away from the world96 97 we all lived in\".12 Truth be told, these are words characteristic of a person with not a grain of talent for philosophy. And this is why Walzer went on to reviving medieval Jesuit casuistry as his \"methodology,\" i.e., something for which no one should be rewarded in Serbia (or anywhere else outside the Vatican). Walzer was first employed as a professor in (19611966) by Princeton University, Harvard (1966-1980), and since 1980 he has been a Permanent Faculty Member in the School of Social Science at the IAS. At Harvard, Walzer taught a celebrated semester-long course with Robert Nozick in 1971 called \"Capitalism and Socialism\". The course was a debate between the two about their views on social justice. This is copy-pasted straight from Wikipedia, except for the added word: \"celebrated\". What could that mean? Internet search brings no evidence that this was a course in any way \"celebrated,\" except that Walzer mentions it in his interviews and in the Introduction to his book Spheres of Justice. Here again we are forced to wonder about the criterion of importance for Belgrade University: What about the fact that Walzer co-taught some course with Nozick at Harvard in 1971? Since Robert Nozick is, of course, a hugely important political philosopher, this looks like a desperate ploy to increase Walzer's rating by hanging his name to Nozick's. And why not hook his wagon to the genuinely celebrated course taught by Nozick and John Rawls? He taught at universities around the world and he is member of the Board of Heidelberg University. He is 12 http://jeffweintraub.blogspot.com/2003_08_01archive.html a long-term editor of the journal Dissent, and editorial member of Philosophy and Public Affairs, Political Theory, and The New Republic. Professor Walzer is the recipient of prestigious international awards, including Spinoza Lens, a bi-annual prize for ethics in The Netherlands, and the German Dr.-Leopold-Lucas prize. Another segment in the Recommendation largely taken from Wikipedia, but it is interesting for what is omitted. Why is there no mention that Walzer holds an honorary doctorate from Tel Aviv University? Is this in order to suggest that the Belgrade University would be the first honorary doctorate for him? That makes things even worse, perhaps, suggesting that we might be the first to have noticed his greatness. To date, he has written 27 books and published over 300 articles. Among the most noted are Just and Unjust Wars (1977), Spheres of Justice (1983), Interpretation and Social Criticism (1987), On Toleration (1997), Arguing About War (2004). Professor Walzer was one of the editors of the big edition of The Jewish Political Tradition. His books (about 15 translated titles) are translated in more than twenty languages. His books translated into Serbian are Spheres of Justice and What It Means to Be an American. What is the significance from the perspective of Belgrade University of this second title, and to what genre does it belong? Is it psychiatry, pedagogy, or a self-help manual on the theme \"how to become (un)desirable in the contemporary world\"? Whatever it might be, it has no apparent significance in the current context. The secondary literature includes more than a thousand titles, and a great number of distinguished journals98 in political theory including Ethics and International Affairs, Polity, Philosophy and Social Criticism have published thematic issues about his works. The position of Michael Walzer has been differently described. What position? In political theory or politics? Those who were composing the Recommendation appear to have lost their train of thought. Usually as a communitarian, but also as radical democratic, social-democratic or liberal. The reason for that clearly is the originality and multi layered character of his works that resist simplistic classification and labeling. Why is a theorist automatically \"original\" when confusions exist even with respect to the characterization of the position in favor of which he is supposedly arguing? Within the \"big tent\" of liberalism – that broad strain of thought originating in the Enlightenment and now perhaps distorted to the point of parody, in say, the starkly anti-humanist neo-liberalism – there do exist variants, and of course, internal disputes and refinements. Walzer's commitments suggest \"originality\" to the extent that the general compatibility between most tenets of liberalism and the cultural relativism inherent in communitarianism is far from obvious. Perhaps it is less of a stretch to find communitarianism consistent with democracy in the US than it is in Europe, where it is often seen as contrary to secular, republican, and yes, democratic political values. This was not lost on at least one American political theorist, Judith Shklar (another brilliant Jewish émigrée the US won as a result of the 99 Hitler's bellicose expansionism), who in a Presidential address to the American Political Science Association, sharply criticized Walzer's conception of democracy as exemplified by groups and clubs, his love of \"Athens,\" and his conception of moral judgment as based on citizens' \"shared understandings.\" Walzer's groups and clubs, Shklar argued, were not the idealized, virtuous collectivities he imagined, but rather closer, in reality, to the \"Teamsters Union, the Ku Klux Klan, and the AntiSaloon League.\"13 Have the authors of the Recommendation ever heard of Judith Shklar, we would like to ask. The reason why Walzer, along with Michael Sandel, Charles Taylor, and Alasdair MacIntyre, is identified as one of the leading proponents of communitarianism is because he believes that political theory must be grounded in the traditions and culture of particular societies. Why is this \"belief\" even worth mentioning? It represents such a basic point that it is well known to any senior in sociology. How such trivial belief could be the reason why someone emerges as \"one of the leading proponents of communitarinism\"? Perhaps it can be so only in case the claim is news for the authors of the Recommendation. And what about the traditions and culture of Serbia, Belgrade, and Belgrade University? For this reason one should be careful regarding interventionist policies and accept a degree of cultural relativism. This sentence means nothing. Who in the name of caution should accept cultural relativism: the interven100 13 Judith Shklar, \"The Work of Michael Walzer,\" in Political Thought and Political Thinkers, Stanley Hoffman, ed., (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 381. tionist politic makers or the communitarian theorist? If at stake is a policy, why the empty normativism (the \"should\")? Will this caution make the policy less interventionist and gentler? What is the point of this fusion of \"apples and oranges\"? However, Walzer also accepts that a certain minimal non-relativist moral core valid for all societies must exist, and that it includes prohibitions of slavery, genocide, and serious crimes committed by the state. What is evident from this remark about what Walzer \"accepts\" is that neither Walzer nor the authors of the claim are philosophers, for they fail to recognize a well understood point: the statement trivially follows from the universality of morality. And when one emphasizes what should be common knowledge, this appears like a rediscovery of the wheel. For this reason Walzer's solution is atypical for the communitarian authors, it recognizes political and cultural specificities and the preservation of state sovereignty as the best means for protecting small and less powerful states from imperial policies, but it demands minimal respect of human rights as the condition for the recognition of the right to self determination of communities. Confusion abounds in this passage. First, the recognition of political and cultural particularities is in fact typical for all communitarian authors. Secondly, how is it possible to claim that Walzer favors respect for sovereignty of small and weak states when he urged interventions all around the globe, such as bombing of Yugoslavia, and the wrestling away a part of its territory: Kosovo and Metohija? Isn't Walzer in contradiction with himself when he advocates both respect 101 for human rights, including the right of self-determination for minority communities, which inevitably leads to violations of state sovereignty, and also favors respect of that sovereignty? And in any event, how exactly does he think that sovereignty will protect a small or weak state from the imperialist policies of powerful states? Doesn't this paragraph appear like a dog's breakfast of ideas that entirely lack in clarity? Because of the importance he gives to the right of self-determination many have considered his theory to be radically-democratic. In one sense this it true and makes his theory extremely functional from the perspective of American imperial and interventionist policies based on the \"sovereignty of citizen\" as \"endangered minorities\". But, it is also a sign of a contradiction in it, for sovereignty cannot be defended as a value while at the same time viewing positively the fracturing of the state by supporting any \"self-determination\". Walzer's most important intellectual contributions include his theory of \"complex equality,\" and revitalization of just war theory. The theory of \"complex equality,\" he presented in the book Spheres of Justice as a response to the celebrated A Theory of Justice by Rawls holds that the metric of just equality is not some single material or moral good, but rather that egalitarian justice demands that each good be distributed according to its social meaning, and that no good (like money or political power) be allowed to dominate or distort the distribution of goods in other spheres; and an argument that justice is primarily a moral standard within particular nations and societies, not one that can be developed in a universalized abstraction. This102 book presents one of three most influential theories of justice in the last decades of the twentieth century. Again with help from Wikipedia we see the authors of the Recommendation make an irresponsible claim. It is indefensible to place an original thinker like Rawls on a par with some critic, commentator, and opponent of his, like Walzer. Rawls is today an American classic, who is compared to Hobbes in significance (as Americans like to say to us Europeans: \"You have Hobbes, we have Rawls\"), a stature that Walzer will never attain, because there is no basis for that. With his book Spheres of Justice he can only have secondary importance and will remain as such, just like the legions of critics (and apologists) who in the 1970s flooded the pages of journals and built their careers criticizing Rawls. Professor Walzer is also credited with compelling revitalization of just war theory that was abandoned in the name of humanitarian law and the theory of humanitarian intervention. This is scandalous! The authors of the Recommendations are suggesting that the narrative about \"just war\" goes against the idea of \"humanitarian intervention\". We are supposed to believe that Walzer with his story of \"just wars\" is opposing the idea of justified \"humanitarian interventions\". While this would be good news, it is simply false as Walzer is a proponent of humanitarian interventions and since he dislikes \"abstract philosophical experiments\" he was very concretely in favor of bombing Yugoslavia as precisely an example of justified humanitarian intervention or \"just\" war. A just war for Walzer is an aggression of a powerful state against a weak one that takes advantage of a rebellion 103 by minorities in order to destroy and colonize the weak state, but with the alibi of there being \"as little casualties and suffering as possible\". To moralize about just war is to put things on their head. Similarly, the distortions by the authors of the Recommendation can deceive only those who don't have a duty to be familiar with this \"great thinker,\" but are in the position to judge the wisdom of the recommendation. He believes that it is necessary to weigh both the reasons for waging the war and the way it is conducted, and not only the means used by the warring parties. Here again the lack of understanding by the authors of the Recommendation is glaring. What is the difference between the \"way a war is conducted\" and the \"means used\"? How the authors would explain this is mysterious, for it is a meaningless distinction without difference. Principal rules are the rule of proportionality and absolute noncombatant immunity from war. Sounds seductive, but the trouble is that Walzer himself opposed all proportionality-based arguments when he wrote about Israel's attack on Gaza. This is detailed in Jokić's \"Michael Walzer's Sense Of Proportionality: Another Casualty In Israel's Offensive Against Gaza?\"14 Not to mention the difficulties that \"immunization of non-combatants\" presents, however, during the NATO aggression, the only concern appears to have been \"immunization\" of the pilots dropping deadly ordinances from the dangers of combat, which is evidently why they flew above ten thousand feet. 104 14 http://www.swans.com/library/art15/aJokić05.html His theory insists on the importance of ethics in wartime while eschewing pacifism as an untenable position. Hence his ambivalent attitude towards NATO intervention in Serbia and sharp opposition to wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. This is the biggest lie in the Recommendation. Walzer never had an \"ambivalent attitude,\" which he confirmed during his visit to Belgrade admitting he was surprised to hear that he would receive the honoris causa \"because of his support for the NATO intervention\". What is more, in 1999 Walzer was in agreement with then Supreme Allied Commander Wesley Clark, when he lauded \"the not-so-efficient air assault as ultimately just\".15 This is a case of prostituting the so-called theory of \"just\" war. It is precisely Walzer's own use of the \"theory\" in this way (and in more than one case) that signifies the moral and intellectual dishonor of the academic community, as one of those who have done the most to destroy whatever value the theory might have had by turning it into a means of political apologetics. This is why the formulation by the authors of the Recommendation – presumably written by someone with an academic title – is so shocking (as something that was done in Belgrade). At the very least Belgrade must be the place where it is perfectly clear that the events of 1999 were an illegal aggression on a state that did not attack anyone, and those with academic titles who wish to recommend someone for an honorary doctorate have the obligation to be informed about the views of the one who they are in this way promoting. 10515 see: http://www. tikkun.org/article.php/Tikkun-TheAgonyofDefeat He was in the group of 58 intellectuals who signed the Manifesto against war campaigns of the US President George Bush in the wake of terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. And what about it? This is yet another reason in support of giving him the honorary doctorate? What is the value or relevance of Walzer's signature against the Bush wars for Belgrade University? Why didn't he demonstrate against the bombing of Yugoslavia – so that the nomination of Walzer for this honor would make at least some sense – but, instead, he was a loud proponent of that bombing, yet this did not mitigate against nominating him as it obviously should have (even apparently in his mind). It is not difficult, however, to answer why Walzer was not demonstrating against the bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999: In the US, \"critical public intellectuals\" are partisan opinion makers whose role is to offer high brow or low brow support (as the case might be) to the policies of the political party that implements them when in power. Michael Walzer is close to \"democratic\" policies (which, of course, does not make him a leftist, for the Democratic party in the US is equally right wing as the republican party). As a \"democrat,\" in the sense that refers to political parties in the US, and not a \"democrat\" in the usual sense, Walzer defended Clinton wars and his bombings of Somalia, Iraq, and Afghanistan, but opposed the Bush wars (until he learned to accept, then embrace them as post bellum occupations). The opposite is done by \"talking heads\" that are ostensibly from the right, who attacked the Clinton wars but defended those started by Bush. That both groups, however, are at hand when serving apologia for American imperialism is of critical im-106 portance to move the public to support any war (regardless of which party is in power that is starting it).17 Thus, we could predict that in case of a combined US and Israeli attack on Iran (or some such place in the Arab world rich in oil) under the Obama administration, Walzer would support it using some version of his adaptable (hence morally suspect) story about \"just\" war.18 Such is the nature of his casuistic \"methodology,\" perfect for institutionalizing hypocrisy. Secondly, we must point that the alleged Manifesto against Bush wars, supposedly signed by Walzer, may 107 17 On this see more in Aleksandar Jokić \"Get This: Imperialism Is Bipartisan\" at http://www.swans.com/library/art12/aJokić01.html. 18 Since the writing of this article in 2010, the Obama administration has indeed attacked (at least one) oil-rich Arab nation. That Walzer, with a tone halfway between the disappointed professor and the irritated prophet, chided the US for its recent participation in the disastrous \"R2P\" project in Libya, hardly contradicts our claim regarding the untenable variability of his just war theory: indeed, Walzer's reasons for opposing the Libyan action – in particular the lack of extreme repression worthy of humanitarian intervention – are no more than suggested, while instead he points out which cases would have received his imprimatur. What is significant in Walzer's „just war analysis\" of the Libya case is how little there is there that could be universalized by others. What we have, from a philosophical and political perspective, is what ultimately amounts to an idiosyncratic pronouncement, of the kind that only the anointed may make. Thus, Walzer's position here, as elsewhere, is that of the prophet – as Judith Shklar has put it – and not, sadly, although we can agree with his preference, that of a scholar, as the scholar's preference, absent justification that can be evaluated by others, is absolutely useless. Of note, finally, is that Walzer-perhaps he is above this? – does not deign to discuss the Security Council (and the Obama administration's) determination that in fact humanitarian motives existed to justify intervention in Libya pursuant to the new Responsibility to Protect doctrine. Where Walzer's contribution might have been of some use would have been had he had the interest to address this, but alas, his lack of practical engagement with his preferred administration's incorrect decision must speak to our initial (and constant) point. For Walzer's position on Libya, see: http://dissentmagazine.org/online.php?id=462 not exist. If the authors of the Recommendation are referring to the so-called \"The Euston Manifesto\"19 it is in no way against Bush wars. In fact, it supports the US occupation of Iraq, as one commenter sums it up perfectly: \"Translation: the signers proclaim that the Left should be helping, not opposing, the US occupation of Iraq. After all, teaching the backward natives the art of self-government is part of the White Man's Burden!\"20 But, there is a document that more closely resembles a \"Manifesto Against Bush Wars\" composed by Walzer's colleagues, political scientists.21 The awkward truth here, however, is that Walzer did not sign it, perhaps because he does not want to be seen as international relations scholar or political scientist, but as a philosopher. His academic and public engagement Professor Walzer directs towards spreading the idea of social justice, democracy, and the establishment of a tolerant regime of international regime. Strictly speaking this is yet another untruth. The statement is defensible only if the method for spreading the said values is taken into account: by way of \"humanitarian interventions\" or \"just\" wars that the Sixth fleet conducts here and there around the globe, in order to \"protect citizens from their undemocratic regimes\". Walzer supports such interventions22 while believing that they bring about justice, democracy, and 108 19 http://eustonmanifesto.org/the-euston-manifesto/ 20 http://www.counterpunch.org/farley0527 2006.html 21 \"Security Scholars for a Sensible Foreign Policy An Open Letter to the American People\" (http://www.counterpunch.org/security10122004.html) 22 See http://www.dissentmagazine.org/ article/? article=740) cessation of suffering. However, he is yet to draw an ex post facto critical lesson of the price of such support, in light of massive casualties and suffering \"interventions\" inevitably cause. His great contribution is to have shown that concrete problems of our time can be addressed with the apparatus of political theory and political philosophy that used to be considered abstract disciplines removed from political reality. What is going on here? Had somebody written this about a local colleague he would be ridiculed for decades. Will someone really think that the world had to wait for Walzer to reveal that the concepts of political theory and political philosophy can be applied to concrete problems? This is indicative of a total intellectual impotence by the authors of the Recommendation as they struggle to formulate something impressive about their nominee. But they only manage to degrade the \"great thinker\" as this suggests that in reality he lacks the great contribution that would recommend him. If he had made such a contribution, it would be easy to point to it concretely. As to what concerns the application of normative philosophical ideas to the problems of our time (i.e., applied ethics) this was originated in the 1970s with James Rachels' work on euthanasia and Judith Jarvis Thompson's paper on abortion, for what they have done involves precisely the application of abstract philosophical concepts – deploying famous philosophical thought experiments that Walzer so deplores – to concrete problems. Since that time it was entirely unnecessary for Walzer to contribute anything to philosophy, something he never even attempted since, as 109 he put it, he never \"managed real philosophy\". Hence, this paragraph consists of only trivialities and untruths. And even if what is stated here were completely true, why should anyone at the Faculty of Political Sciences care about it? What is necessary in order to gain an adequate understanding and appraisal of the political conditions in the world of today is a complex theoretical mechanism and careful assessment or arguments and counterarguments without moral arrogance and self-confidence that leads to a simplified black and white picture of the world. Who is it that in contrast to Walzer sees the world in black and white? These are generic and trivial claims without serious justification. When did the counterarguments of Yugoslavia, Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan have any merit for Walzer? Never! At issue are in fact the orchestrated counterarguments at conferences where groupthink happens and \"just\" war is discussed in an atmosphere of scholastic debate on subtleties. Decades long editing of the journal Dissent which fosters a leftist and anti-imperialist orientation testifies to such an attempt. 110 23 Dissent's initial funding was assured by Muriel Gardiner. Her husband, Joseph Buttinger, active in the International Rescue Committee – once a small organization devoted to saving Jews from Germany and occupied Europe that quickly became coopted with American intelligence agencies-was a member of Dissent's editorial board, and signed articles supporting the US war in Vietnam in its pages. The cooption of both the left and the right by US intelligence for the pursuit of a \"broad foreign policy consensus\" is the object of an increasing number of detailed historical accounts. On Dissent and Buttinger, see Eric Thomas Chester, Covert Network: Progressives, the International Rescue Committee and the CIA, ((New York: M.E. Sharpe, 1995), 202. This is simply hilarious! Dissent magazine was founded in 1954 by Irving Howe, Lewis A. Coser, Henry Pachter, and Meyer Schapiro.23 This group together with Sidney Hook (the only philosopher among them and a rabid anti-communist), Irving Kristol, and Norman Podhoretz (the latter was a leading neoconservative in the last Bush administration) were part of the so-called Congress for Cultural Freedom. This Congress was organized and lavishly funded by C.I.A. with the aim of controlling what is publicized by alleged \"leftist\" intellectual circles and in reality fake leftist magazines.24 Today this is so well known that on the C.I.A.'s own website it features an article that proudly details this construction of the fake left.25 In any case, it is no longer an unknown fact that C.I.A. controls all enduring leftist circles in the US, which makes the left in the new world a deception, more like a pop-culture pose than anything.26 It is hardly engaging in polemics to recommend that readers not be satisfied by the self-identification of publications (or individuals, for that matter) – in particular if they were established or gained prominence during the cold war and in even more so if they advertise their leftist credentials – it was the local and Western European left that was the prize in the cold war propaganda battles, and it is now known 111 24 See: Frances Stonor Saunders, The Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the World of Arts and Letters, (New York: New Press, 2000). 25 See: https:// www.cia.gov/library/center-for-the-study-ofintelligence/ csi-publications/csi-studies/studies/95unclass/ Warner.html 26 More about this in Frances S. Saunders, The Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the World of Arts and Letters, The New Press, New York (2000), see: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/ B000OVLNK6/sr=1-1/qid=1277568674/ref =sr_11_oe_1?ie= UTF8&s=books&qid=1277568674&sr=1-1 112 that the ideological battlefield extended to almost every discipline in Western academia, but in particular in faculties of Political Science.27 In other words, it is imprudent to take \"left\" on faith: caveat emptor! Consequently, the claim by the authors of the Recommendation that Dissent magazine is a leftist and anti-imperialist publication reveals cluelessness, and ignorance of elementary facts. Leaving this lack of minimal due diligence aside, yet again the question about the criterion of importance for Belgrade University must be raised: Suppose Dissent is a leftist and anti-imperialist magazine, what did that bring us, did they speak out against the bombing of Yugoslavia? They did not, quite to the contrary. Dissent magazine since a good while ago hasn't been, if indeed it ever was, critical towards American hegemony, but it serves as a platform for attacking true anti-imperialist intellectuals.28 It practices dissent in name alone. An attempt strongly inspired by the ideals of justice an international tolerance, to actively influence in a theoretically demanding way the practical politics. It is a promotion of the culture of dialogue, which distinguishes violence and dominance from an exchange of arguments. Walzer's editing of Dissent magazine influences \"practical politics\"? That is completely unrealistic. What is more likely is that it serves to justify what Democrats are doing in international relations and attack what Republicans are doing (even though in 27 See Ido Oren, Our Enemies and US: America's Rivalries and the Making of Political Science, (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2003). 28 See http://louisproyect. Wordpress.com/category/liberalism/ reality both are doing the same thing: developing Pax Americana) in order to create an illusion of influence and justify policies put in place by Democrats as being allegedly a result of fruitful dialog. As a leading political philosopher of today No sentence in this Recommendation supports this claim, while almost every paragraph exhibits only contrary evidence: that the claim is in fact completely groundless. Professor Walzer will on June 17 open the international conference on international law and ethics, The International Law and Ethics Conference Series (ILECS). These conferences have since 1996 attracted leading moral, legal, and political philosophers in the organization by Professor Jovan Babic and Dr. Petar Bojanic At the Faculty of Political Sciences until this scandal they knew nothing about ILECS. This is why it is unsurprising that the authors of this document are writing elementary falsehoods about the history of this project (for more on this, see Pecat of June 18, 2010). with support from Serbian Philosophical society and the department of Philosophy at the Faculty of Philosophy. On this occasion translations into Serbian of two books by Michael Walzer will be published (Just and Unjust Wars, published by Sluzbeni Glasnik, and Politics and Philosophy published by Albatros Plus) and Professor Walzer will give a lecture at the Faculty of Political Sciences, as part of the graduate course on \"Theories of Justice\". At the Faculty of Political Sciences several graduating theses where written dealing with the Walzer's theory of justice, and a number of Master and Ph.D. dissertations have been devoted to his contribu113 tions to political philosophy of communitarianism. Walzer's theory about spheres of justices is studied in several courses at the Faculty of Political Sciences (\"The History of Political Theories,\" \"Theories of Justice,\" and \"The Politics of Resistance and Civil Disobedience\"). All of this is of secondary importance and testifies to the crudeness and sloppiness of the authors of this text. The second book is improperly cited, the title is Morality and Dirty Hands: Philosophy, Politics, and War and it isn't a translation of an existing book by Walzer but a selection of his essays on the problem of dirty hands. But even if everything stated in this paragraph were correct the question would have to be asked: All right, but why should he be given an honorary doctorate for any of this? There are dozens of authors whose work is the subject of graduate theses and whose books are translated into Serbian, and none of them were recommended for this recognition. We believe that recognizing Michael Walzer by giving him the honorary doctorate would contribute to the affirmation of the university in the world and would be an incentive for international cooperation. The Recommendation, as can be seen from our analysis, is without basis. None of the presented claims can amount to a set of sufficient reasons that would support a nomination for this high honor. As far as the work of Michael Walzer is concerned, our intention was not to negate its value, but to point out that at best it cannot be set apart from dozens of other authors who will never be nominated for the recognition in question. As we have emphasized before, the work by itself cannot be sufficient for the award. This Recommendation fails to114 show that Walzer has made any contribution to the scholarly cooperation between Belgrade University that awards the honor and any segment of American culture or academic community. The only kind of cooperation that can be recognized is one with the official Washington whose policies are framed within Walzer's theory of \"just\" war. But, then, the partner cannot be Belgrade University, nor even the state of Serbia which is in this respect forced into a delicate balancing act, but only a perverted ILECS – entirely deprived of its original conception and purpose – which is explicitly singled out as the occasion for awarding this high honor to Walzer. Hence, even after our detailed analysis, we only know the occasion, but not the reason for honoris causa. Consequently, speaking of a contribution to the \"affirmation of the university in the world\" (which is the line repeatedly heard during this scandal from the Faculty of Political Sciences), as a result of recognizing the kind of zealous laborer like the laureate in question can only be a form of dilettantism and cynicism. The Recommendation from the Faculty of Political sciences ends with the date: – No signatures by authors – In Belgrade, March 29, 2010 General Conclusion Our textual analysis of the Recommendation demonstrates that it is unsound; it contains falsehoods and dangerously misleading claims, many of its assertions are ungrounded, revealing ignorance, unbefitting university professors. It looks to redeem itself by relying on political 115 claims with no scholarly merit, is composed on an ideological propagandistic model, structured in a sloppy way, and it is at times even ungrammatical (possibly because of too direct translation from English, English Wikipedia at that.). When we take into account that despite the utter poverty of this document, it nonetheless served as a sufficient basis for actually awarding the honorary doctorate to Michael Walzer, then the scandal acquires an entirely unexpected dimension. For we can rightly conclude that the procedure that lead to a successful award ceremony had involved a twofold deception. The authors of the Recommendation deserve to be sanctioned by their institution because they deceived the Instructional-Scientific Council of the Faculty of the Political Sciences, while this Faculty deserves reprobation for betraying the Senate of Belgrade University and its Rector. It stands to reason that nominations for such high honors are received on the basis of trust in the judgments coming from the nominating Faculty as a competent institution, that the members of the Senate, whose decision is final, and the Rector himself, are not obligated to be experts in a given field as a precondition for being able to follow a procedure resulting in an informed decision. To that extent the actor most responsible for this scandal is the Faculty of Political Sciences, primarily for approving at its Council meeting of April 22, 2010 a recommendation like this one, which by itself is an example of academic outrage. Additionally scan dalous is the fact that the document representing an official \"recommendation\" was printed on a paper without the letterhead and without the signature of its authors. Hence, to this day it remains unknown who actually authored it. Is it really possible that such a document actually made it all the way to the University Senate? 116 As for the candidate, now already laureate, we have seen that what sets this political scientist apart is not the quality of his scholarship (at least a dozen scholars exist who are in that domain stronger than him) but his intellectual activism; he operates as an \"expert publicist\" specialized in promoting American interventionism nicely wrapped into the theories about \"just\" war and \"humanitarian interventions,\" that is bombing of everyone who stands in the way of this neo-im pe rialism (assuming they are too weak to mount a \"counter blow\"). What remains especially enigmatic is why did the nominating party choose to conceal the fact that Walzer was a proponent of the bombing of Serbia and a supporter of suppressing Serbia's sovereignty over Kosovo and Metohija, when he himself did not conceal it at the award ceremony. What we have presented here offers yet another reason for the University to react, rescind the bestowed recognition, revoke the honorary doctorate, and sanction the Faculty of Political Sciences for its irresponsible act. If this is not done, there would be no reason not to continue with this practice, and award other similar candidates, like Xavier Solana, Bill Clinton or general Clark and other heroes of the 1999, including numerous \"laptop killers,\" foreign and domestic \"anti-war profiteers\" who are proud of their similar activism and who probably applaud this candidacy but understand that it is still not the right time to say it publicly. In Belgrade, Aleksandar Jokić June 28, 2010. and Milan Brdar (Weekly Сведок, no. 727, June 29, 2010, pp. 12-15 ) 117 P E T I T I O N TO THE THE SENATE OF BELGRADE UNIVERSITY On the same day we sent to the media our analysis titled \"Dirty Morals and Clean Hands\" a group of Belgrade University professors sent to the Senate a Petition with the following content: Dear Colleagues, We are addressing you with the demand that you rescind your decision to award an honorary doctorate of Belgrade University to Michael Walzer, Professor at Princeton University, in the United States of America. We are convinced that in your deliberation about the recommendation that an honorary doctorate be awarded to Prof. Walzer, you were not informed about all the facts regarding his public endeavors. Even before the NATO attack on Serbia, and certainly during the bombing, Michael Walzer was one of the most well-known proponents of military intervention against our country in American academic and intellectual public life, and he has remained so to this day. Just recently, he reiterated his support of NATO aggression against our country, which was contrary to elementary norms of international law and any civilized morality, in his interviews to the Serbian media. During its long history, Belgrade University has always shared the destiny of its country and people: it was so both during the world wars and the NATO118 3.3 119 attacks against Serbia in 1999. The honorary doctorate given to Michael Walzer, taking in consideration his public activism, represents indirect but still unequivocal justification of NATO aggression against Serbia and is thus contrary to all democratic and freedom loving traditions of Belgrade University. Belgrade University today, as has been the case throughout its past, has to be guided by the ideals of freedom, justice, and national dignity, and hence once more we demand of you to invalidate the decision to award the honorary doctorate of Belgrade University to Michael Walzer. In Belgrade, June 28, 2010.\n\nPART FOUR: DECEPTION AND INDIFFERENCE\n\nANATOMY OF A DECEPTION The University Admits the Hoax Belgrade University is shaken by two affairs, and the central figure in both is the American political theorist Michael Walzer, who last June was awarded an honorary doctorate by the university, even though in 1999 he called for a \"humanitarian\" military intervention against Serbia, and still today blatantly advocates the claim that Kosovo is an independent state. The first to protest publicly and forcefully against awarding the highest university honor to Walzer were Serb philosophers Milan Brdar and Aleksandar Jokić, who considered it an act of national selfhumiliation. They were joined by another 204 university professors, doctors, and assistants with their petition demanding that Walzer's honorary doctorate be revoked, and under this public pressure the University Council decided to appoint a working group tasked with \"examining all conditions that lead to awarding the honorary doctorate to Michael Walzer.\" On Wednesday, October 27, the University Senate adopted a report according to which the highest university offices were indeed victims of deception, but despite this, the honorary doctorate given to Michael Walzer was not revoked. 4.1 The fault has been established but the doctorate was not revoked, which indicates that the honor bestowed on Walzer was a result of political pressure, estimates professor Milan Brdar. The working group of the Commission on university honors at its September 22, 2010 meeting concluded: \"that the Faculty of Political Sciences has offered in its recommendation inaccurate and incomplete information, for it did not point out that Professor Walzer was calling for a land invasion of our country. Had this fact been known by the Commission it would have not forwarded to the Senate a recommendation that a honorary doctorate of Belgrade University be awarded to Professor Walzer.\" The report also quotes the official letter that the Committee for university honors had already transmitted to the Senate on July 1, stating: \"The report by the Faculty of Political Sciences omits relevant facts, which, had they been known by the Committee for university honors, would have certainly influenced the decision whether to award Professor Walzer the honorary doctorate, thus the Faculty had caused the error of not only the Committee, but also of the Rector and Senate.\" \"Retraction, however, simply does not exist in the bylaws governing university honors. True, we might have invoked some other legal instruments and due to the procedural omissions, returned the whole process back to the beginning, and then at the outcome of the new process, not awarded the honorary doctorate to Walzer. However, the Senate agreed that at this time it is sufficient that we have accepted our part of responsibility and ascertained how it all happened. Practically speaking, we expressed regret about124 what was done, but we held it to be inappropriate to insist on any further measures, for as one of the discussants said, there were in our country important people who expressed the same views as Walzer\" – was what we were told by the Prorector professor Marko Ivetic, who presided over the working group. Professor Milan Brdar, who, with Professor Aleksandar Jokić, started the initiative for revoking the honorary doctorate given to Michael Walzer, thinks that with this decision by the university Senate the American political theorist has been honored for a second time. The claim that no legal measure to correct the error exists is painful for the ears! No statute anticipates errors, particularly of this magnitude, but that does not mean that they cannot be corrected, if they happen to be made. The question is whether the members of the Senate understand that the honor of the university is at stake, particularly in light of the new fact that the Committee has ascertained that both it and the Senate had been deceived by the Faculty of Political Sciences. Hence, it has been determine that the honorary doctorate was awarded in June based on ignorance, but despite admitting the error there is no consequence, thus indirectly the honorary doctorate is re-confirmed! This is scandalous, it would have been better if the Committee and Senate had undertaken absolutely nothing than their labor resulting in this, says professor Brdar. A Doctorate at Any Cost The report by the working group of the university Council reveals that Professors Kostic and Sijacki on 125 the day of the awarding of the honor to Walzer, demanded that that the ceremony be postponed for a day, in order for the Senate to consider the decision one more time \"in light of new information that the Committee, and in all probability members of the Senate, did not have at their disposal.\" At first the Rector agreed to the postponement, but after the Dean of the Faculty of Political Science insisted that the ceremony not be postponed \"the Rector decided that the ceremony of awarding the honorary doctorate should after all take place.\" [Weekly Arena, No. 42, November 2, 2010, pp. 16-17.] [In all likelihood this story is untrue. According to our sources in the Rectorate, it is true that the Rector, faced with our demand intended to postpone the official ceremony in order to engage in further consultations. He abandoned this as a result of outside interference, and backing from the nominator at the Faculty of Political Sciences. Crucial for the final decision was the intervention by a functionary from the Democratic Party.] 126 THE LAST WALTZ CALLED WALZER AT BELGRADE UNIVERSITY On Wednesday November 27, 2010, at a meeting of the University Senate, a report was adopted in which the Commission established by the Senate unequivocally condemned the awarding of the honorary doctorate to Michael Walzer, the proponent of the NATO intervention against SR Yugoslavia. It is interesting that such conclusions by the Commission led to no concrete action: neither was the honorary doctorate awarded to Michael Walzer revoked, nor was FPS and its Dean, Ilija Vujacic, made to suffer any consequences for the sort of nomination they submitted on the basis of which the award was made. What is your assessment of the session of the Senate and what are your expectation regarding the resolution of the \"Walzer\" case? When on July 15, the Senate authorized the Commission to consider again the Walzer matter, although it had become known why he did not deserve the title of honorary doctor, only two conclusions came to mind: either this was the chosen path to do nothing, or this was a tactical move to correct the error and, after a period of time, revoke the honorary doctorate. The latter was the wiser option, if you think that at the helm of the university sit serious people who care 127 4.2 about the honor and reputation of such an important national institution as this university. All in all, finally, on October 27 the Commission filed its report to the Senate in which it states that the Faculty of Political Sciences had submitted inadequate information, and that the Commission had it known the truth would not have recommended to the Senate to honor Michael Walzer. The Senate adopted this conclusion. That is to say, this eminent body has admitted that a mistake had been made. Unfortunately, left out was the only remaining move given the consequences – to revoke the honorary doctorate. That was not done, and this constitutes a new scandal in this case. The University Council and Rector, Professor Kovacević, last summer insisted on the lack of awareness about certain facts as the reason the honorary doctorate was awarded: they did not know that Professor advocated military intervention against our country. Now from that side we have silence, though it can be heard on the hallways of the Rectorate that just ten days before the session of the Senate the Rector was favoring \"facing the consequences\". How to understand this restraint, given that the Senate in the end decided to undertake nothing? The members of the Senate, and the Commission itself, did not have an obligation to personally verify whether the proposal coming from the FPS was justified. The responsibility for the veracity of the information rests on the party making the recommendation. The adoption of the Commission's report determining that a mistake was made, due to a blameworthy action of the FPS, is entirely appropriate. How, then, to account128 for the absence of the next step, and what are the consequences of this inaction? The explanation given is that no legal basis exists in the Statute for any action that would inflict consequences on anyone. But, no Statute takes into account that the body whose actions it regulates would make such a serious error. Defending the honor of the institution, however, is primarily a moral obligation with respect to which appeals to legalist considerations have no weight whatsoever. The concern about the honor of the institution is that much more appropriate when we realize that the recognition that a mistake was committed is combined with total inaction with respect to appropriate sanctions, and this brings about a whole new set of facts. First, the Senate has indirectly and after the fact confirmed or approved the decision to award the honorary doctorate. Thereby, the harm done is considerably increased. That is, while in June the explanation was that the members of the Senate \"did not know who they were honoring,\" and hence the defense of the honor of the university was still possible, now the same award is indirectly recognized on the basis of the \"knowledge about the committed mistake,\" or despite of it, primarily because of the decision to do nothing about this mistake because, oh well, there is \"no legal basis\" for any action. To be precise, this decision, that combines the recognition that a mistake was made while giving up on sanctions, is the crucial moment representing both the indirect authentication of the honor already bestowed and the neglect to \"defend the honor\" of the institution. That is, this is an act of obliquely legitimizing the mistake made in June of this year! In a word, the Commission was formed in order to do nothing. The 129 Senate, therefore, was capable of committing the mistake, but incapable of correcting it. Secondly, by admitting to the mistake while refraining from any further measures, the Senate has not only recognized its own helplessness but also that of the University, which means that it has conceded the primacy of politics in the domain of its own autonomy. That is truly scandalous. The scandal was actually already committed in June, when the University administration permitted politics to be implicated in the case and yielded to the political decision to proceed with the award. This is what explains the now publicly (yet indirectly) acknowledged helplessness, which is justified by the \"incompleteness of the Statute.\" And finally, as the third fact that emerges, the Senate has publicly admitted that at stake was a great swindle on the part of the FPS, but with its decision of October 27, as opposed to its June decision, the Senate is now an accomplice to the deception. That deception took place is confirmed, but there is no sanction! Hence it is a logical question to ask: Do the members of the Senate understand what they did that day, or has the moral breakdown in the country wiped out the University administrators' power of judgment as well? In the context of bestowing the honorary doctorate upon Michael Walzer, how do you see the role played by Jovan Babic, Professor of Ethics at the Philosophy Faculty, the man who in the 1990s together with Professor Aleksandar Jokić founded the International Law and Ethics Series (ILECS), only to effect, in the last few years, a radical break with the original conception for those meetings? After Walzer was decorated with the130 honorary degree Professor Babic has declined (as far as we know) all requests for interviews that should have served the purpose of answering all allegations you and Professor Jokić have expressed in your public \"Protest Against National Self-Humiliation,\" which was written just before the last ILECS meeting on the topic of \"Asymmetric Wars, International Relations, and the Just War Theory\" would take place in the Festival Hall of the Rectorate on June 17-19, 2010. This conference was attended by 14 participants from abroad and only a single representative from our universities, Professor Jovan Babic. Three speakers at this conference were proponents of bombing Serbia (Michael Walzer, David Luban, and Igor Primorac). Despite the fact that the entire mission that consisted of the ceremonial bestowing, but also justifying the honorary doctorate given to Michael Walzer, is enshrined in total mystery of an underground endeavor, not unlike the practice of the communists between the two wars, Professor Babic was in all likelihood among the instigators of this action. That he is a professor of ethics from the standpoint of Anglo-Saxon moral philosophy can easily be justified along the lines: \"Nothing personal!\" for it is \"a job like any other\" so that the expertise in moral matters does not imply that the expert himself will behave morally (that is a private matter). Consequently, his occupation as professor of ethics does not preclude his taking part in preparing the nomination of Michael Walzer, an ideologue who advocated in favor of the military \"intervention\" against our country. If, therefore, ethics as a subject one teaches does not obligate one to act ethically then 131 the said nomination, which is unrelated to the professorship, can only be interpreted to mean: \"Nothing personal!\" The conference you are mentioning, about which we wrote last summer in Pecat, was originally conceived with patriotic character and goals in mind29. Currently, as organized by Professor Babic, it only serves his personal affirmation in the US and domestic pro-American circles that operate under the auspices of the existing regime. This also explains why this year's conference included only one participant, besides Babic, from the host country. With this same goal in mind we can understand the inclusion in the conference program of three authors who supported the bombing of Yugoslavia. This would mean that the said professor has joined the enviable number of our intellectuals who have invested themselves into acquiring the view about the American \"progressive role in the world\" and its crusades \"in the name of democracy and human rights\" by way of \"humanitarian\" military interventions – all the way to justifying the bombing (of their own country) and the ultimate \"it was our fault!\" (for getting bombed). They, in this, not only have no shame, but they are prepared to \"educate\" the rest of us to feel shame for still holding on to the values of national integrity and identity, and particularly dignity. Professor Babic could write the book The Ethics of Crawling, which would enlighten us on the merits of that sort of locomotion and entering into Atlantic integrations, with special focus on the \"backwardness and primitivism\" of the traditional view that the upright stepping is natural for people (which has 132 29 See article included in this book on pp. 33, et passim been the justification for the usual designation homo erectus). In the widespread moral breakdown of society and the state, then, one professor, among many, is simply taking structural advantage, instead of sounding the alarm. This only tells us that as an individual, his significance is exhausted in representing a symbol or paradigm of the moral breakdown characteristic of the current university intelligentsia. That such cases are much more numerous among University staff than those who the critics of their behavior count on for support can explain at least three things: first, it explains why the Senate was incapable of facing any practical consequences (in the hallways one could hear: \"so what, many of us agree with Walzer!\"); second, it explains why after the \"Walzer affair\" Professor Babic enjoys \"better marketability\" everywhere (member of the management board of RTS, president of the Central board for the social sciences in the Ministry of Education and Sciences, and so on); and third, with respect to his avoidance of interviews, Professor Babic counts more on the \"wall of silence,\" imposed through the political control of media, than on any engagement in a dialogue. And he appears to be right: any discussion under patronage of the regime that offers him support would prove pointless. Or, to paraphrase the great writer: the situation is such that his opponent would \"always be at a loss.\" And, if so, why waste the time and words. Your philosophical monograph Philosophy in Duchamp's Pissoir (2002), offers the most thorough understanding of the process that our state and we as a people have been forced to go through. \"Postmodern 133 pedagogy of getting used to the Duchamp's urinal\" (as one chapter is entitled) is still under way, and it appears that it will not end before the ongoing lobotomy of Serbian people is completed. Describe the essence of this pedagogy and what lesson are we working on now. The essence is the same as the process that elevated the infamous Duchamp's urinal to the status of a work of art. The urinal is an ordinary human product and a work of art is the same thing with an elevated meaning. Since 2000, Serbia has been subjected to the same process of reduction-elevation. First, in the 1990s, they reduced us to the level of a pissoir, using all means of the anti-propaganda only to confirm the level of the state pissoirization by the act of bombing in the spring of 1999. Truth be told, the country was not pissoirized from within. With the puppet regime installed in October 2000, commences symbolic and democratic elevation of Serbia, all the way to the acknowledgment that we are worthy of European culture and civilization. However, the reality is that only since then has the state become pissoirized (and criminalized) internally, to the point of the total collapse of public morality and its system of values. The point of the applied pedagogy is for us to accept the state of our catastrophe as \"the real deal,\" since that is the ticket that takes us into the society of the modern and progressive. The anticipation presented in the book written before the bombing, unfortunately turned out true and is still applicable. Thus, I recommend to the readers to look for a more detailed explanation inside the book. Philosophy, in your view, presently resides in the Boudoir of the Marquis de Sade. Describe for us how134 does de Sade's orgiastic machinery function, this machinery of the global rich that represents the structural and functional modus operandi of the global order. Yes, the title of the book, Philosophy in Duchamp's Pissoir, was strategically chosen to associate to de Sade's work Philosophy in the Boudoir. Philosophy, and not only the local variety, but also the European as well as American philosophy, finds itself in the sort of space that looks as if it emerged from a combination of the urinal and the boudoir. Using the same process by which an ordinary ceramic urinal of Marcel Duchamp was elevated to the rank of a work of art, which is a phenomenon of the 20th century, I have shown, on the one hand, that our Western friends have turned our country into a stinky urinal, while on the other, pursuant to bringing a puppet regime to power, they then elevated the same urinal to a model of democracy, \"a leader in the region,\" even though nothing had changed. Truth be told, almost the entire contemporary world has been pissoirized, and that pissoirization, until recently, was called globalization, which is really a process of grave-ization of everything distinct, identity-making, including all values that characterize all serious peoples and cultures. Graveization as a global process accompanied by Americanization, is manifested in two processes: on the one hand, trivialization of everything serious, on the other, elevation to the status of seriousness of all kinds of triviality and idiocy, as long as they have politico-instrumental value. In all of this, philosophy, it appears, is powerless, so once it is itself trivialized, all it can do is decorate this general state of pissoirization with the 135 bright values from the western gallery of phantom freedom and democracy. There is no question that in all of this there is plenty of sadism and masochism. In other words, philosophy, together with social sciences, has largely assumed the role of a chambermaid in the political boudoir of Americanization. The government of the Republic of Serbia on October 27 announced that it is offering a 10 million Euro award to one who \"provides a credible and true information that could lead to location and arrest of The Hague accused Ratko Mladic.\" This is yet another act that also demands a multidimensional analysis of the pedagogical process of pissoirizing Serbia. This government this year, precisely since bestowing the honorary doctorate to Michael Walzer, has been on the path of moral, political, and national demise. With the majority of people that make up the government being former Tito's pioneers and youth, acting as if they just emerged from the communist party committees, they are unable to abandon the communist-democratic methods of finding solutions to problems. Even though they have institutions that are paid to work, they cannot bring themselves to give up pushing for the widest initiatives among the citizens (who used to be the working class), all in an attempt to turn all of us into \"informants\" of this \"democratic\" regime. Thus, a few years back they offered telephone numbers to report instances of corruption. Now they have reached the high point with this offer of ten million Euros. That is as morally odious as it is politically idiotic. First, despite the barrage of outlandish promises, they have reduced people to136 the unseen level of poverty, capable of gathering only around public soup kitchens and garbage containers. Then, as icing on a cake, comes this offer of ten million Euros. \"Let's feed the Hague dragon, never mind that hundreds of thousands among us are hungry. What is important is that one of us with an act of denunciation will tomorrow solve all his problems!\" Moral abomination and political idiocy (those are the right words) come from the fact that in this country, the citizen is disrespected and undervalued, and as such he is then offered ten million Euros that could serve to open who knows how many jobs or aid who knows how many families. With all that, the agencies will continue to be paid, except that citizen will do their job. That is another illustration of the pissoirization of Serbia from within, that in the moral sense nothing of the proper order remains. As I wrote in the book: \"I am a conscious citizen of the world!\" In that situation every, and in particular moral criticism, can have the meaning of the naïve self-discovery of the Huxley's Savage, as a candidate for re-education. [Weekly Печат, no, 139, November 5, 2010, p. 38.] 137 EPILOGUE The Walzer affair cast a stark light on the Rector and the members of the Senate of Belgrade University, showing that they, as individuals, and as a group, neither know nor care how to act on behalf of an institution, or that they, as individuals, are subordinate to it. With their egregious error, compounded by their impotent refusal to correct it in any way, they have shown themselves to be utterly and irrevocably undeserving of their place. The stain for which they are ultimately responsible has tarnished the university's reputation, and will remain in the annals of its history. That many members of the Senate stubbornly refused to grasp that they had committed a grievous error was apparent from the comments some of them made while leaving the conference room after the meeting on October 27, 2010: \"What's the big deal? Many of us agree with Walzer [regarding Kosovo and the bombing of Serbia]!\" What the wise person is ashamed of the crazy is proud of! A separate episode of this case represents the process of collecting signatures for a petition by professors and doctors at the Belgrade University, initiated in July 2010, and which had generated about 260138 4.3 signatures by the time of the Senate meeting on October 27, 2010. This petition was included on the agenda of the meeting under the rubric \"Communications,\" but was not discussed at all. Curiously, the initiators of the petition made no public comment regarding this oversight. The third episode consists of a new scandal from March of this year, 2011. When Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin was visiting Serbia, the plan was to award him the honorary doctorate of Belgrade University! That was, in fact, a compensative attempt to \"save face,\" and to make up for not having taken corrective action at the October 27, 2010 Senate meeting. In our article from Pecat, of June 18, 2010, regarding the honorary doctorate bestowed upon Michael Walzer, we had warned that with such choices of laureates Belgrade University is risked ending \"up as a provincial dump that no one takes seriously\" (see above, pp. 33, at passim). That is exactly what transpired with Prime Minister Putin, though in a quiet and stealthy way. Namely, during the visit, it suddenly emerged that because of a full schedule Prime Minister Putin \"had no time\" to stop by the Rectorate and pick up his honorary doctorate. No time was the verdict, though that evening he spent more than an hour watching a football game at the Red Star stadium with bikers from Serbia. With this the Prime Minister sent more than a clear message: \"Что случилос, господа? What did you think gentlemen, that you can use me to clear the dishonor of the University? I don't think so!\" Didn't he thus signal to us that time with local motorcycle enthusiasts is much more valuable to him than paying attention to 139 the intellectual elite of this country, given the way it is, incapable of paying attention to national interest and the dignity of the oldest national University? But that is not all, for the Walzer affair also has yet another phase. It was accomplished by the Rector Kovacevic, who was offering excuses to the press that the honorary doctorate was not given to Prime Minister Putin because of his busy schedule, and volunteered to \"at the moment's notice travel to Moscow and bestow upon Putin the honorary doctorate.\" With this the Rector additionally humiliated the institution he represents and manifested that: (a) he is ready to take it out even to a flea market, and (b) that he understood nothing. Because of this, he no longer deserves to be sent requests for resignation, but to be instantly and unquestioningly removed, that is, if only there were anyone capable of pulling off such an apparently epic task. The Senate in its present form, and the University as it is, will be incapable of digging itself out of the mud this time. That this is not an exaggerated statement is clear from the final scandal. An anonymous source told journalists of the production group \"Mreza\" that the certificate of the honorary doctorate is waiting for Putin at the student services and he can pick it up at any time. 140 PART FIVE: SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT\n\nJUST WAR THEORISTS OR JUST WAR CRIMINALS Aleksandar Jokić Introduction The just war theory made its unlikely comeback in large part due to Michael Walzer's popularizing efforts. One of its most remarkable achievements was its application in the form of \"humanitarian intervention\" to absolve the US-led NATO aggression against Yugoslavia in 1999. Yet on June 17, 2010, Walzer was decorated with an honorary doctorate from Belgrade University; the ceremony took place not far from the remains of buildings destroyed by NATO in the center of the city. One may, then, rightly contemplate the meaning of gestures of this sort: What could tempt people, particularly the intellectual elites, to even consider honoring those who advocate aggression against their country? Why honor someone hailing from a hegemonic power in a weak state that witnessed and directly felt the fury of that power that left behind thousands dead and the whole country in physical, psychological and economic devastation? These are complicated questions to answer, but in this paper I shall consider a more basic issue: What is a just war theorist? 5.1 Historical Development of the Doctrine The doctrine of just war theory has a long history and its invocations have gone through a series of shifting context of applications. Initially developed in the context of Catholic theology, the theory was also taken to have moral implications, thus transitioning into the secular domain, which at least by the 19th century and certainly by mid-20th century also accommodated a legal interpretation. Finally, with the effort of Michael Walzer, the doctrine reintegrated the moral domain in political theory, and later moral philosophy. Taken as a contemporary legal theory it consists of two components: the ius ad bellum is that part of international law governing resort to international armed conflicts. The ius in bello is the law of war properly so styled, namely, the body of rules governing the conduct of parties engaged in international armed conflict. These are also the main constituents of this doctrine as it originated in the theological context. The founder of the Christian doctrine of just war is St. Augustine who gave it its first formulation in Contra Faustum. Therein St. Augustine asked the critical question: \"Is it necessarily sinful for a Christian to wage war?\" His negative and exceptive answer − that wars are just if waged to avenge injustice or to coerce the enemies of the Church − is generally considered as the first appearance of the specifically Christian doctrine of just war. As he so often did, St. Thomas Aquinas, in his Summa Theologica, repeated and elaborated St. Augustine's view. The Thomist formula embodies the medieval and scholastic thinking, about the just war and remains of great influence in the doctrine144 of the Catholic Church today. Aquinas answered the question posed by St. Augustine in the negative, provided: (i) the Prince had authorized the war; (ii) there was a \"just cause\" against the adversary on account of some guilt on his part; and (iii) the belligerent had a \"right intention,\" i.e., to promote good or to avoid evil. The main emphasis was upon the requirement of a just cause, which was considered to be a matter of moral theology. Thus the Thomist view made the question of the \"justness\" of all wars one that fell within the jurisdiction of the Church. From 1618 to 1648, Europe was ravaged by the Thirty Years War. This period of bitter struggle between Catholicism and Protestantism generated its own ideological contribution to the just war doctrine, adding a purely theological component of ius ad bellum: war for the cause of religion. The violent clashes were lamentably without restraints. The trouble was that the just war doctrine had relatively little to say about conduct in warfare (ius in bello) beyond condemning perfidy (breach of promises) and the slaughter of women and children because war against them was not \"just.\" The lack of restraint was compounded by 14th and 15th-century ideas that the victorious Prince was waging a just war and, as the agent of God, punishing the defeated, as the devils in hell would punish them in the next world. The victory was the judgment of God as to the justness of the cause of the victor. The war could not be considered just on both sides because God's will was not divisible. These were the strands that made up the fabric of the classic just war doctrine of the late medieval period. 145 In the 16th and first half of the 17th century, three notable Englishmen: William Ames, a Puritan theologian, William Fulbecke, a lawyer, and Matthew Sutcliffe, clergyman, academic and lawyer, excluded religion as a basis for the just war doctrine. Francisco de Victoria and Francisco Suarez contributed to further integrating the classic just war doctrine into the overtly secular and legalist doctrine of the modern international law of war. Thus, from the mid-seventeenth century until the mid-twentieth, the idea of just war largely disappeared as a conscious source of moral reflection about war and its restraint. Hugo Grotius, John Locke, and Emerich deVattel removed the last lingering traces of the medieval just war doctrine which led to the modern doctrine entirely based in nature and agreements among men, with no backwards glances seeking divine approval. The central vice of the medieval classic doctrine was that it oscillated between aggravating cruelties in war, because the victorious Prince as the agent of God was punishing the unjust defeated, and a high level of artificiality that left it without an impact upon the content of the ius in bello. In particular, it failed to promote the idea that the ius in bello applied irrespective of the justness of the cause. This idea has in fact been impeded by the long history of the just war doctrine and has taken centuries to become established. The indivisibility of God's will was too serious an impediment to the notion that a war might be just for both sides engaged in it. Some of the most appalling atrocities of medieval warfare were visited upon civilians (who had not the honor to carry arms) at the hands of the military (for146 whom this privilege was reserved). Yet this law of arms yielded ideas not without value for the subsequent development of the modern international law of war. First, it contributed the idea of a body of rules governing the military class irrespective of frontiers or allegiance and irrespective of the justice or injustice of the initial resort to war. Second, it affirmed the idea that war, properly understood, could be waged only by sovereigns. Thus, the medieval legacy of the just war did yield something of value to posterity. Mainly under the force of Church disapproval, expressed by anathema, it gave no place to private war or indiscriminate foray, which were the curse of medieval society. To such private wars the law of arms gave no acceptable status. Claims to ransoms and spoils would not be upheld. It made some attempt to bring to book professional freebooters whose behavior was synonymous with terror, brutality, and looting. The requirement that the war be public and open evolved from the Thomist formulation of the just war doctrine, which excluded the \"private war\" of the feudal lord. The Thomist formula insisted that for a war to be \"just\" it had to be \"public.\" Once the modern territorial states had been established, their resort to arms became open by necessity, and soon no form of fighting could properly be a war other than that waged by a sovereign state. In the second half of the 19th century, under the impact of a collection of ideals that might be termed secular humanitarianism, the laws and customs of war were subjected to a major codifying redaction at the First and Second Hague Peace Conferences of 1899 and 1907. This was the era of positivism, the high noon of 147 state sovereignty, and the virtual expulsion of the just war doctrine from the picture. States might, in accepted international law of the day, resort to war as a legitimate instrument of national policy. With the gradual recession of that claim, through the progressive stages of the Covenant of the League of Nations, the Pact of Paris, and the United Nations Charter, a new doctrine of the just and lawful war – limited to individual or collective self-defense – and of collective peace enforcement, appeared as the new ius ad bellum. Necessarily, the old question reappears: Does the ius in bello bind the aggressor and the selfdefender alike? Some – most prominently Michael Walzer – would argue that waging an aggressive war is the supreme international criminal act and that those who take part in such a war are participants in this criminality and are not entitled to the protection of ius in bello. Such arguments would bring us back to the evils of the medieval classic just war doctrine and all the miseries that accompanied it. The humanitarian law theory and its associate, the human rights theory, reject discrimination among participants in war whether on the side of the aggressor or of the defender. But, Walzer's revivalism of the classic just war doctrine, as we shall see, appears bent on bringing back the worst of this medieval doctrine. Walzer, Hypocrisy and Just War Theory Michael Walzer finds moral reassurance in hypocrisy. I don't. The public spectacle of mutual accusations of hypocrisy by irreconcilable ideological opponents, especially when war breaks out, reveal, according to148 Walzer, shared moral knowledge. On this too I (and others) disagree. Walzer, in his book Just and Unjust Wars29, begins his revival of the medieval, Catholic just war tradition with the claim that exposure of hypocrisy may be \"the most important form of moral criticism30\". For \"wherever we find hypocrisy,\" states Walzer, \"we also find moral knowledge31\" : hypocrites presume \"the moral understanding of the rest of us32.\" Uncovering the moral reality of war is to be accomplished, according to Walzer, through unmasking the hypocrisy of politicians and generals by putting their words to the test of the emerging ethical facts. But even before these claims went to press, Walzer must have known that he was wrong about the alleged revelatory power of hypocrisy to present us with shared moral knowledge. For his colleague and friend, Judith Shklar, would have told him as much. Might this be an early sign of Walzer's hypocrisy in selling known error for knowledge? Shklar would have taught Walzer, first, that charges of hypocrisy quickly bring about counter-accusations of the same, and, second, that these imputations do not \"imply shared knowledge, but mutual inaccessibility.33\" She would have also taught him as a third lesson that \"the very notion of wars as either just or unjust is by no means universally accepted among the citizens of liberal democ149 29 Michael Walzer, Just and Unjust Wars, 2nd ed. (New York: Basic Books, 1992). The first edition was published in 1975. 30 Walzer, p. xxix. 31 Walzer, p. 230. 32 Walzer, p. 29. 33 Judith N. Shklar, Ordinary Vices (Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press, 1984): p. 81. racies34\" ; and fourth, most importantly, she would have insisted that it is wrong (both in the sense of \"morally impermissible\" and an error) \"to put hypocrisy first\" (in her sense of ranking any vice above cruelty) because it \"entangles us [...] in too much moral cruelty, exposes us too easily to misanthropy, and unbalances our politics35.\" There is no evidence that Walzer had unlearned all four lessons, but he most certainly decided to dismiss the second and the third insight. Hence, it stands to reason that a just war theory erected on the erroneously attributed epistemic status of hypocrisy as revealing alleged moral facts (\"shared moral knowledge\") will exhibit all three of the undesirable outcomes Shklar urges caution about: moral cruelty, misanthropy, and unbalanced politics36. That this is the legacy of Walzer's just war theory must be argued elsewhere, but expect at least a glimpse of it to become evident even in this article. However, before turning to our main concern – the study about the fundamental nature of a just war theorist – it is worth exploring the importance of the lesson that extreme caution is in order regarding Walzer's revivalism37 of the medieval ideas about 150 34 Shklar, pp. 79-80. 35 Shklar, p. 86. 36 For these insights by Shklar and criticism of Walzer I must thank Tiphaine Dickson, \"Under An Empty Sky: Ethics and Law in Morgenthau and Walzer\" (unpublished manuscript) where she argues against the conventional view that Hans Morgenthau eschews morality in his construction of a realist theory while Michael Walzer is reclaiming moral argument for political theory, as placing things exactly on the head. 37 As with most \"isms\" this one too is intended to suggest that there is something wrong with the project. \"just\" war. In its early applications, the idea of just war served the purpose of justifying the bloody crusades all the way to the desecration of Hagia Sophia and the Latin occupation of Constantinople in April 1204. The looting and devastation of the greatest Christian city of the medieval world by other (Western) Christians precisely when the Byzantium was under pressure from Islam is a reminder of what can happen when one is ideologically armed with a just war theory: not much room for compassion regarding even your Christian co-religionists appears available, but only \"moral cruelty, misanthropy, and unbalanced politics\". Before the final fall to the Ottomans in 1453, for almost two centuries Byzantium was forced to consider the option of the union of the churches in response to the desperate need for military help from the West to combat the Seljuk Turks. But Western spiritual leaders had made a precondition of any assistance the reunion of the churches with Constantinople subordinated to Rome. This humiliating conditioning of military aid with acceptance of papal primacy, together with the enduring and vivid memory of the just war sacrilege of 1204 lead to the Byzantine proverbial saying: \"Better the Turkish turban than the papal tiara38\". Walzer's initiative to revive the Catholic medieval just war doctrine three quarters into the 20th century may appear additionally peculiar as it skips backwards over the singularly important historical con151 38 See Judith Herrin, Byzantium: The Surprising Life of a Medieval Empire (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2008), particularly chapter 27. tributions of the Enlightenment, and neglects the greatest results in the history of moral philosophy in general and on the question of morality of war in particular by the most important Enlightenment thinker, Immanuel Kant, who so brilliantly systematized the ideas of freedom and rationality. And as Walzer's colleague and friend, Judith Shklar, again reminds us, Kant sees war as beyond the rules of good and evil; hence not a practice that can be just or unjust.39 It belongs to the domain of necessity, and the only imperative regarding war is to end it as soon as possible. Kantians cannot approve of the just war theorist's labors as they view him as \"encouraging people to enter upon wars recklessly and then bap152 39 Curiously, some authors characterize this view of Kant's, that no just war is possible, as \"the traditional reading\" and contend that Kant has a just war theory. See, for example, Brian Orend (1999), \"Kant's Just War Theory,\" Journal of the History of Philosophy, 37, (199):pp. 323-53. Orend claims that that there are \"three basic perspectives on the ethics of war and piece with realism and pacifism at the extremes and just war theory in the middle,\" and he rules out that Kant can be seen as either a realist (based on a comically crude rendition of the international relations realism) or a pacifist so he must be a just war theorist. This is not the place to argue this, but I strongly reject both the claim that Kant is a just war theorist and that there is anything Kantian in the newly developed socalled \"contemporary Kantian just war theory.\" See, Brian Orend, War and International Justice: A Kantian Perspective (Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1999). Similar misuse of Kant occurs in the contemporary \"democratic peace theory\" by authors such as Michael Doyle who assert that Kant would condone the spreading of democracy by military means. See, Michael Doyle, \"Kant, Liberal Legacies, and Foreign Affairs,\" Philosophy and Public Affairs, 12, No. 3. (1983). It is well known that Kant was not a good friend of democracy, but even if he were, the idea of this post-Cold War doctrine, so comforting for the US hegemonic inclinations, is another distortion of his philosophical thought. tizing his own side with the holy water of justice. Every enemy can easily be made to look the aggressor40.\" The fate of Yugoslavia in 1999 arguably involves precisely such an example where an aggression, by nineteen most powerful countries against a small state that attacked none of them, through capricious manipulation of just war \"rules\" became baptized a just war. Walzer was chief among many Western publicists who first urged, then cheered the aggression, but was practically alone in also demanding a ground offensive. Yet another reason exists that makes the timing and nature of Walzer's revival of just war theory curious. It occurs in the period of unprecedented progress in inter national law where, regarding ius ad bellum, aggression is marked as the supreme crime per Nuremberg precedent and embedded as such in the U.N. Charter, while a number of elements introduced in the positive international law regulate ius in bello, such as the Nuremberg Principles or the four Geneva Conventions. But Walzer has no respect for this paper world of international lawyers, and instead opts for yet another medieval Catholic invention: the casuistic method in determining what is just and unjust with respect to war. Of course, this opens up the unpleasant possibility that the legal and just war theoretical (presumably moral) judg153 40 Judith N. Shklar, Ordinary Vices (Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press, 1984): p. 80. In my judgment this statement by Shklar has to be the most brilliant thing ever said about the character and telos of a just war theorist. Hopefully, the rest of this essay will provide further support for this insight. ments about an instance of war are opposed to each other. What to do about a war that is deemed \"illegal but good\"?41 A powerful state, bent on waging war, could in such a case want to emphasize the latter and ignore the former verdict. Such a gift from just war theory to raw power! This was exactly the case with the US-lead NATO aggression against Yugoslavia in 1999. 154 41 Examples of pronouncements about the goodness of NATO aggression against Yugoslavia despite its illegality are not difficult to find among public figures (politicians) and scholars turned publicists. Here is Vaclav Havel: This war places human rights above the rights of the state. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was attacked by the alliance without a direct mandate from the UN. This did not happen irresponsibly, as an act of aggression or out of disrespect for international law. It happened, on the contrary, out of respect of the law, for the law that ranks higher than the law which protects the sovereignty of states. The alliance has acted out of respect for human rights. (Vaclav Havel, \"Kosovo and the End of Nation-State,\" New York Review of Books, 10 June 1999: 6.) Hence, when a supreme crime in international law – aggression – is committed – of course without a mandate from the UN – that can still be a good thing, because some presumed \"higher ranking\" (moral) law will somehow obviate the illegality in question. Convenient \"morality\" trumps law, in the view of this politician. But also scholars exist who are capable of asserting the same. A good example is Antonio Cassese, who evaluates NATO's 1999 aggression against Yugoslavia as \"illegal under international law\" but in his \"ethical viewpoint resort to armed force was justified\" (Antonio Cassese, \"Ex iniuria ius oritur: Are We Moving Towards International Legitimation of Forcible Humanitarian Countermeasures in the World Community?,\" European Journal of International Law 10, No 1, 1999: 23.) Thus, the vocabulary of \"illegal but good\" enters narratives about international relations with the serious conesquence of effectively decriminalizing aggression of powerful states against the week ones. This could not have been achieved without Walzer's revivalism of medieval just war theory. Scholarship vs. Activism Let us now consider directly the question: What is a just war theorist? War is a very serious and grave matter. Yet discourse about (just and unjust) war is not always as serious as is warranted. \"Serious\" normative judgment in this context requires keeping in clear view the interdisciplinary matrix of values. In the moral order, the phrase \"unjust war\" attaches a particularly powerful stigma of wrongful action on the part of the accused alleged perpetrators; in the political order, the use of this phrase is a call to action; and in the legal order its meaning is defined in the existing documents of positive international law via the conceptually linked term \"aggression,\" and the (legal) rules about the conduct in war. Given that the discourse about war may equally occur within moral, political, and legal domains, the minimum of seriousness while engaging in the war-discourse requires a precise and explicit \"indexing\" to the specific normative order of usage. Elsewhere42 I have shown that Walzer does not meet this minimum of seriousness required of proper scholarship: \"Despite [the] relevance of morality for the other two normative orders [legal and political], it is very important to keep the three separate at all times. In fact, the effort to avoid conflation of these normative orders is a mark of serious and responsible scholar155 42 Aleksandar Jokić, Michael Walzer's Sense Of Proportionality: Another Casualty In Israel's Offensive Against Gaza? Swans Maga zine January 26, 2009; available at http://www.swans.com/ libra ry/art15/aJokić05.html (last accessed on december 9, 2010). ship, or discourse about normative matters in general. All too often normative discussions fail to satisfy this basic requirement. Such is the case with Michael Walzer's recent discussion on proportionnality. \" 43 Already in his first paragraph, Walzer confuses the moral and legal orders and perhaps the political as well. Right after claiming that \"disproportionate\" is the favorite critical term of the partakers in the discussions on the morality of war, Walzer accuses those same (unidentified) people of not knowing what this term means in international law. Is Walzer claiming that before one can formulate a moral judgment using the term \"disproportionate,\" one must ensure that it is used in the same sense as in international law? Could not a practice be disproportionate in a way that it might justify a moral judgment that the practice in question is wrong without thereby amounting to a legal claim that the practice is forbidden by international law? Contrary to Walzer's apparent claim, this seems quite possible. To make things worse, Walzer slams yet another accusation at his targets claiming that \"they don't realize that [\"disproportionate\"] has been used far more often to justify than to criticize what we might think of as excessive violence.\" What might Walzer mean here by talking of those who use \"disproportionate\" to \"justify\" excessive violence? Is the justification he has in mind moral, legal, or simply political? I am afraid 156 43 Michael Walzer, \"On Proportionality: How Much is Too Much in War? The New Republic, January 8, 2009 (accessed online on December 9, 2010: http://www.tnr.com/article/politics/proportionality). that the only meaning that can be attached to \"justify\" in this context is political – as what appears to be the subject of justification is a certain policy regarding use of excessive violence – thus completing Walzer's mess of conflating all three normative orders in just the first three sentences. Returning to our discussion, it is particularly worrisome when the legal and political uses of the word \"war\" are bifurcated, as we have seen with the example of the phrase \"illegal but good\". War-discourse is replete with conceptual \"mix ups,\" and bifurcations of this nature which can, and often do, result in serious harms to those who find themselves on the receiving end of inappropriate uses of this discourse. A significant part of contemporary war-discourse rarely meets even the basic standard for the minimum of seriousness, which suggests that the magnitude of abuse that it may generate is potentially significant. A general deficit of seriousness, in the above technical sense, suggests a practice that may not be entirely compatible with any scholarly work, as the latter always requires a methodology that rules out (ideologically driven) arbitrariness and randomness to the maximum possible degree. With this (discursive) context in mind, and specifically the dangers it is fraught with, a \"just war theorist\" would, broadly speaking, be a kind of scholar or expert. By invoking the ideas of scholarship or expertise, I mean to account for the meaning of \"theorist\" in the phrase \"just war theorist\". When we look up the word \"scholar\" in an English dictionary we find that it refers to a learned person who has a great deal of knowledge, especially an academic, someone 157 who is a specialist in a given branch of knowledge. So, for example, a \"just war scholar\" would, then, be a learned person whose branch of knowledge is (just and unjust) war. To be more precise, we would not consider war a \"branch of knowledge,\" rather scholars from a number of branches of knowledge might choose to focus on war as their subject: international lawyers, political scientists, or philosophers, for example. A scholar from any of those branches of knowledge (or other disciplines) who decides to \"specialize\" in war might then qualify as a \"just war scholar.\" However, there is another phrase that is sometimes utilized that indicates a somewhat relaxed usage; it is (just war) \"expert.\" When we look up the word \"expert\" in a dictionary we find that it refers to a person with a high degree of knowledge of a certain subject. So, a \"just war expert\" would be someone with a high degree of knowledge about the subject of just and unjust war (not necessarily an academic or someone trained in moral philosophy). When we think about the subject of war, the label \"just war expert\" reveals an unintended yet suggestive ambiguity. It could mean (i) someone particularly skilled in perpetrating a just or an unjust war in various ways that this can be done, or (ii) someone (presumed) particularly skilled in determining which historical episodes of violence, including in particular the current events, constitute just or unjust wars. Let us call the skills described in (i) \"war-engineering skills\" and people who have them \"war-engineers,\" while the skills described in (ii) might be called \"just war-pronouncing skills\" and the people who have them \"just war-pronounce-158 ment-makers\" or \"just war judges\". It goes without saying that in the current discourse on war everyone partaking in it, qua \"expert,\" wants to count as expert of the latter sort, and not many would want to be notorious as experts of the former kind (certainly not as engineers of unjust wars as that is tantamount to being a war criminal). Everyone would rather be a pronouncement-maker than an engineer in this respect. It is not difficult to see, however, that a good case can be made for maintaining that many partakers in the current just war discourse generate nearly as much harm as if they were in fact war-engineers. This would have to be argued in greater detail elsewhere though the already invoked example of the \"humanitarian intervention\" against Yugoslavia in 1999 may be sufficient to clearly show it. The dominant desire of just war discourse partakers to be just war pronouncement makers, or just war judges, is nicely explained by the shift in terminology from \"scholar\" to \"expert\" in this area. It is characteristic of the current Western discourse that many who are not associated with any institution of higher learning or research (or those who are might be untutored in moral philosophy) still want to be in the position to authoritatively pronounce on these matters. Often this is done as a call to action. The non-scholarly experts who desire to authoritatively pronounce on the occurrence of events that would make war just include journalists, NGO operatives, think-tankers, or even government officials serving on various presidential task forces or are intelligence operatives. The danger hidden in this idiosyncratic practice of social epistemology is clear: 159 once pronouncements about just war are made by \"experts\" they become virtually irreversible since credibility in the political sphere usually depends precisely on firm positions and opinions, viz., the refusal to revise calls one has made or reverse oneself. Of course, these characteristics are virtually contrary to the epistemological virtues associated with real experts, i.e., proper scholarship. This makes the already weakened methodological rigor embedded in the very nature of the just war theory, as we have seen, relaxed even further, to the point that what passes for \"scholarship\" in this domain resembles more closely ideology, advocacy, and lobbying than anything approaching science or philosophy. The question about the occurrence of a just (or unjust) war is a question about the existence of facts that can in principle be discovered and identified (assuming one would – in a non-Kantian spirit – even want to engage in \"practicing\" just war theory). A war does not become just (or unjust) as a result of a pronouncement by persons (somehow) vested with the authority to do so. An occurrence of just war is not something governed by institutional rules as is the case with, for example, marriage: the right person under the right circumstances, where \"right\" in both cases is institutionally defined, can create a new institutional fact by simply uttering that \"(by the powers vested in me) I pronounce you legally married.\" It results from the discovery of the relevant evidence left in \"nature\" and our records of it rather than institutional procedures and political decisions. One who would want to claim such \"institutional power\" for oneself to make pronouncements on the justness160 or unjustness of wars, no matter what his actual expertise may be, is not a true scholar, but an activist engaged in promoting, advancing, or recommending policies having to do with war. However, activism on this matter must clearly be delineated from any kind of scholarship as in this context it in fact brings about the third degree of separation from scholarly inquiry, and how vividly this brings out the Kantian concern so well formulated, as we have already seen, by Walzer's colleague, Judith Skhlar: \"encouraging people to enter upon wars recklessly and then baptizing his own side with the holy water of justice. Every enemy can easily be made to look the aggressor.\" Hence, this sort of activism is twice removed from any kind of scholarship; instead, it is only parasitizing on a notion of sound inquiry (as it exists in science or philosophy), which gives the activist the aura of undeserved importance. It is worth summarizing the three degrees of separation between the practices identified above and anything that could properly be considered scholarship or rational inquiry (in particular philosophy). The first degree of separation is the mentioned general failure to consistently index \"just war\" judgments to appropriate normative orders (moral, legal or political); the second is associated with the practice of allegedly authoritative (non-scholarly yet expert) pronouncement making or judging wars as just or unjust; and the third is activism in the form of advocating for and promoting certain wars (usually those your side is undertaking, planning, or contemplating). Consequently, in light of these considerations, the phrase \"activist scholar\" is an 161 oxymoron. Yet, \"activist-scholar\" is the term used for example by Amnesty International to describe William Schabas and other panelists at its 2002 Annual Assembly.27 That this is an incongruous proposition can be shown in two ways. First, activism and scholarship are incompatible activities that cannot simultaneously characterize what one does. To give an analogous example, one cannot be a racecar driver and air plane traveler; although, of course, a race car driver can travel by plane (say to the site of his next competition) he cannot be racing cars while traveling by plane. Similarly, activism effectively suppresses proper scholarship and at best puts it the subservient position. Secondly, activism and scholarship don't combine very well because the former quickly consumes the latter the way fire consumes flammable materials such as paper; hence just as paper and fire cannot be in the same place for very long, activism tends to consume scholarship just as comprehensively. This consuming of the other relationship can go further than activism overwhelming scholarship as in the case of an intelligence operative who takes as cover the role of an activist; in that case, activism is consumed by the intelligence operation. Hence, true scholarship must be conducted independently of any activism or intelligence scheme. 162 44 Amnesty International USA, \"Reframing Globalization: The Challenge for Human Rights,: available at http:// www.amnestyusa.org/ events/agm/agm2002/panels.html (accessed January 9, 2011). For Amnesty International Schabas is an \"activist-scholar\" with respect to events in Rwanda as he was a member of the International Commission of Inquiry that produced a highly influential report on the situation in Rwanda. More on the exploits and the report by this Commission below. The just war theorists are clearly not well positioned in this regard. Finally, one may even wonder what should be the proper characterization of a just war theorist and activist, whose pronouncements of justness are applied to wars of aggression (i.e., when he baptizes an aggression his country is engaged in as just)? Would this be a criminal act of incitement to international violence, an act of aiding and abetting aggression – the supreme crime in international law? Would this make a just war theorist into a war criminal? The Dangers of Public Just War Activism Normative judgments, be they moral, legal or political, are as good as facts that support them. Activists can easily be wrong in this regard (no matter the alleged degree of their expertise in presumably relevant fields of knowledge). Bad facts can only lead to bad normative statements, which depending on the context can bring about dire consequences for the innocents. Activism with such consequences, of course, cannot be condoned! It leads to the effects Shklar has poignantly warned us about: moral cruelty, misanthropy, and unbalanced politics. It would be useful to see this on an example. The case I want to consider will contrast the normative results of the globally unreliable \"Report by the International Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights Violations in Rwanda since October 1, 1990\" (ICI), published in 1993, which was relied upon in a substantial manner against Léon Mugesera, and the exhaustive, meticulous, and rigorous analysis in the 163 September 8, 2003 judgment of Mugesera v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (F.C.A.).45 On November 22, 1992, at Kabaya, Rwanda, Léon Mugesera made a speech (in the Kinyarwanda language) at a partisan political meeting in the context of external war and internal political conflict. It is the ICI that first brought the news out of Africa about the speech and provided its authoritative (\"expert\") interpretation. The striking conclusions drawn by the ICI without questioning the persons involved were that Mugesera's speech constituted an incitement to commit murder, genocide, and constituted a hate crime. The ICI report had a substantial impact in the media and among other NGOs, and its carefully selected passages from the Mugesera speech crystallized quickly into the unshakable construal according to which the speech \"incited the people of Kabaya to kill all Tutsi Rwandans and throw them in the Nyabarongo River so they can go back to their country of origin, Ethiopia.\" This all sounds very bad! Indeed, since the Mugeseras had made Canada their home in 1993, the 164 45 The report was published (apparently) only in French on March 8, 1993 by Africa Watch/New York and Fédération Internationale des Droits de l'Homme (FIDH)/Paris. The original title: \"Commission Internationale d'Enquête sur les Violations de Droits de l'Homme au Rwanda depuis le 1er octobre 1990 (7-21 janvier 1993). Rapport final\". Hereafter cited as \"ICI\". The report was financed mostly by an NGO, Africa Watch (later renamed Human Rights Watch) and compiled by legal experts (William Schabas, Eric Gillet, René Degni-Ségui, et al.) and human rights activists (Jean Carbonare, Alison Des Forges, Philippe Dahinden, et al.). Mugesera v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) (F.C.A.) is available online at http://reports. fja.gc.ca/eng/ 2003/ 2003fca325/ 2003fca325.html (accessed last on December 9, 2010). I urge careful reading of this document. ICI report's conclusions regarding Mugesera prompted in 1995 the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration to initiate deportation procedures because the speech constituted an incitement to commit murder, an offence against the Criminal Code of Canada; this made him an inadmissible person according to the Immigration Act. More specifically, the information publicized in the ICI report led the Minister to make the following allegations of law which, in his opinion, justified the deportation of Léon Mugesera (and his family, a wife and five children): (A) The speech made on November 22, 1992 constituted an incitement to commit murder; (B) by inciting \"MRND members and Hutus to kill Tutsis\" and inciting them \"to hatred against the Tutsis,\" the said speech constituted an incitement to genocide and an incitement to hatred; and (C) the said speech constituted a crime against humanity.46 These are very serious allegations indeed, and the court had to deal with both the questions of fact− explanation and analysis of the speech− and a question of law− whether the speech is a crime, once the speech is understood and analyzed. With some simplification, it is fair to say that since the case against Mugesera was based on the ICI report, which made the speech a high-profile subject of controversy, its credibility – and in particular of its claims regarding Mugesera's speech – were critical to the immigration case. And the court found that \"the ICI report, at least in its conclusions regarding Mr. Mugesera, is ab165 46 Based on a more detailed summary in Mugesera v. Canada (my emphasis). solutely not reliable.\"47 Since this case would not have existed in the first place without the ICI, which was in the end rejected as unreliable on more than compelling grounds, it is of interest to us, which is the whole point of the example, to see how the experts who are also activists fared in court. It is instructive in this regard to quote the judgment in extenso: \"The Minister's decision to seek deportation and the decisions of the adjudicator, Appeal Division and the Trial Division Judge were all decisively influenced by the ICI report. ICI co-chairperson Alison Des Forges, called by the Minister as an expert witness, admitted that the Commission's report was produced \"very quickly, under very great pressure\". She also acknowledged that, as a human rights activist, she could not claim objectivity although attempting to maintain neutrality as between political factions. She even admitted that some of her accusations \"will inevitably [be] shown to be false\". She finally conceded that the speech might be regarded by some as \"legitimate self-defence\". She also admitted that no witness interviewed by the ICI had been present when the speech was made. Another admission was that, from the evidence she had been able to obtain, the only impact of Mugesera's speech had been vandalism and theft. She declined to identify the person who had provided the ICI with the transcript from which the translation used by ICI was prepared. When cross-examined as 166 47 See paragraph 117. to whether she took out of context passages in the speech which suited her, Ms. Des Forges admitted having done so. She admitted having selected that evidence which supported the conclusions reached by the Commission. Finally, she could not deny having said to a reporter for a newspaper, The Gazette, \"Throw him out on his ear... what are you waiting for?\" It was on a deliberately truncated text of Mugesera's speech that the ICI concluded him to be a member of the death squads. It could only be concluded that Ms. Des Forges testified as an activist with a clear bias against Mugesera and an implacable determination to have his head.\" 48 An \"expert\" witness who admits in court that she cannot be objective due to her activism illustrates very well the degrees of separation between experts and activists on the one hand and scholars on the other. Hanging on to one's activism in court also shows an astonishing confusion about one's role as a court expert that it perhaps raises to the level of contempt of court49. The recognizable but deplorable shtick that human rights trump law50, and one's self-important alleged devotion to ending violence and impunity in a foreign land leave bitter taste. For if you the reader put yourself for a moment in the shoes of a black citizen 167 48 My emphasis. 49 It is quite amazing to me that instead of being held in contempt of court this \"expert\" returned on many occasions to act as a key witness in many cases at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) laying out the history of that country and similarly wanting the heads of many more accused there. 50 We have already seen how Havel played it; see note 13. of some African country, would you really want some white human rights warrior fighting for you at the expense of \"having a head\" of a highly educated black man, your compatriot, based on frivolous and selfserving pretexts? No wonder the judge saw her testimony as completely opposite of \"sober, calm, and non-partisan\" and added: Even making the debatable assumption that a member of a commission of inquiry, who is actually its co-chairperson and co-author of the report, can be described as an objective witness concerning the conclusions of that report, Ms. Des Forges testified much more as an activist than as a historian. Her attitude throughout her testimony disclosed a clear bias against Mr. Mugesera and an implacable determination to defend the conclusions arrived at by the ICI and to have Mr. Mugesera's head51. The consequences of the misguided activism52 exhibited by Des Forges in the case of one man (and his family) are multiplied exponentially when adopted by just war theorists calling for (\"just\") aggressions, surgical strikes, smart bombs, or ground offensives. 168 51 See paragraph 102. 52 This finding is in no way challenged by the fact that the judgment by the Canadian Federal Court of Appeals was reversed by the Canadian Supreme Court (Mugesera v. Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration), [2005] 2 S.C.R. 100, 2005 SCC 40). Des Forges' testimony was directly considered by the Supreme Court, which found that the Federal Court of Appeals had exceeded its jurisdiction by reconsidering evidence tendered in earlier immigration proceedings. Nonetheless, its final decision in this case is an unfortunate example of the corruptive influence of international politics on the quality of domestic legal work. Decriminalizing U.S. War Crimes The pronouncements by the just war theorists do not end with baptizing decisions to go to war by their own side with the holy water of justice. They also pronounce on conduct in war. Here, too, Walzer took the lead. On November 8-10, 2010, a conference titled \"The Enduring Legacy of Just and Unjust Wars − 35 Year Later\" was held at the New York University celebrating the 35th anniversary of this book's publication.53 The conference attendance was by invitation only. What these enthusiasts and aficionados of Walzer's jus-war theory apparently heard from him on this occasion is the following: \"If it is not possible to win just wars fighting justly, then we will have to revise the ius in bello.\"54 Who is the \"we\" that Walzer talks about here? Presumably it is the same \"we\"55 as in the book being celebrated at this conference: the \"we\" is composed of people who intersubjectively share a moral understanding of concepts as they relate to war. The \"we\" thus pertains primarily to his compatriots, it seems. And this is even clearer when we look at the full quote: 169 53 The pamphlet announcing the conference is available at: http://www. nyutikvah.org/events/docs/Walzer%20Conference.pdf. Accessed January 11, 2011. 54 We don't have as yet these words directly from Walzer, but I quote him here as reported by one awed conference attendee, Kenneth Anderson, at: http://volokh.com/2010/11/10/wherejus-in-bello-and-jus-ad-bellum-come-together/. Accessed on January 11, 2011. 55 Referred to by Judith Shklar as \"we,' [Walzer's] favorite characters.\" Judith N. Shklar, \"The Work of Michael Walzer,\" Political Thought and Political Thinkers, (Stanley Hoffman, ed.) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 379. \"The worry is that if you fight in accordance with the legal regimes of international law, you can't win. That is a major challenge, and I was very happy that General [Charles] Dunlap denies that and says you can. Still, it is a worry. It must be possible for the good guys to win within the rules, at least as a possibility, but also as a real possibility. That's where ad bellum and in bello come together: to win a just war fighting justly. But suppose it isn't possible. That's what moral philosophers partly do – worry. What follows if it is not possible, or not a real possibility? What then? Well, the rules would have to be changed. We would have to reconsider the content of the rules ius in bello if we could not live within ius in bello and still have the just side win on the battlefield.\" 56 This allows for the second shoe of the just war theory to drop: having already baptized his own side with the holy water of justice when considering ius ad bellum, thus effectively decriminalizing aggressions by the United States, Walzer now gives his side another gift – the decriminalization of war crimes committed by American troops and their allies during US wars of aggression. If with regard to the decriminalization of aggression we wondered whether this might be a criminal act of incitement to international violence, an act of aiding and abetting aggression, the supreme crime in international law, then we must now wonder whether this \"revision of ius in bello\" in fact amounts to incitement to commit war crimes. Isn't the message 170 56 Kenneth Anderson, Op. cit. to American troops, who are continuously engaged in wars in different places on the globe, that they need not be concerned about \"fighting justly\" since, if necessary, in bello rules will be revised to fit what they do and find convenient in order to win? The rules will be tweaked to fit the American conduct in war rather than the other way around! Consequently, whether we see just war theorists as some sort of scholars or simply as activists, in the end they appear to be just war criminals, both on the count of aiding and abetting aggression and on the count of inciting troops to commit war crimes. 171 ALEKSANDAR JOKIĆ (1960) is Professor of Philosophy at Portland State University since 1999. He served as the founding Director of the Center for Philosophical Education in Santa Barbara, and is co-founder of the International Law and Ethics Conference Series (ILECS). He has authored and edited several volumes and special journal issues. His main research interests are in philosophy of time, applied ethics, and political philosophy, particularly the ethics of international affairs. He was a fellow of The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, as a recipient of a grant in the Program on Global Security and Sustainability for 1999-2002. He is author of Aspects of Scientific Discovery, Belgrade (1996), What's Wrong With It? Philosophical Analysis Put to Work, Novi Sad (2005); he is also editor of Time, Tense, and Reference with Quentin Smith, MIT Press (2003), Lessons of Kosovo: The Dangers of Humanitarian Intervention, Broadview Press (2003), Philosophy of Religion, Physics, and Psychology: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum, Prometheus Books (2009). MILAN BRDAR (1952) is professor of Philosophical Methodology and of Social Science at Faculty Philosophy, Novi Sad University. He was President of Serbian Philo-172 AUTHORS 173 sophical Society in 1997–2000. Until now he is author of Critique of Philosophy of Science and Methodology of KarlReymond Popper (1981); Praxis Odyssey: A Study in Genesis of Bolshevik Totalitarianism 1917–1929, 2 Vols (2000, 2001); Philosophy in Duchamp's Lavatory: A Postmodern Crosscut of XX Century Philosophy (2002), A Futile Call: Sociology of Knowledge Between Ideology and Self-reflection: A Case of Karl Mannheim and of the Enlightenment (2005), Serbian Transitional Iliad (2006); Lessons of Modesty: Open Society, Science and Philosophy, Belgrade (2008). (He is also Editor of Philosophy, Language Community (1999), Serbian Philosophical Society, Belgrade. In the recently published papers he deals with issues in philosophy of language, philosophical methodology, geopolitics and social theory. He is translator of Talcott Parsons' The Social System (1951).\n\nAleksandar Jokić / Milan Brdar UNJUST HONORIS CAUSA: CHRONICLE OF A MOST PECULIAR ACADEMIC DISHONOR Published by Freedom Activities Centre Dr Ilije Kolovića 12, Kragujevac, Serbia For Publisher George Savić Printed by Freedom Activities Centre Printed on \"Heilderberg speedmaster 54 A\" press at Freedom Activities Centre Printers in 555 editions in August 2011 CIP Каталогизација у публикацији Народна библиотека Србије, Београд 821.111-92 JOKIĆ, Aleksandar, 1960 BRDAR, Milan, 1952 Unjust Honoris Causa : chronicle of a most peculiar academic dishonor / Aleksandar Jokić, Milan Brdar. Kragujevac ; Belgrade : Freedom Activities Centre, 2011 (Kragujevac : Freedom Activities Centre). 171 str. ; 21 cm. - (#Biblioteka #Libertarium) Tiraž 555. Authors: str. 172-173. - Napomene i bibliografske reference uz tekst. ISBN 978-86-87863-20-0 COBISS.SR-ID"}
{"meta": {"title": "Unpublished Lecture of Swami Vivekananda at the Barber’s—Vedanta The Soul", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/article", "creator": "Narasimhananda, Swami", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "A new finding of lecture by Swami Vivekananda.", "date": "2015", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/SWAULO", "language": "en", "datestamp": "2019-08-14T09:45:04Z"}, "text": "Swami Vivekananda in New York 477PB July 2015 Swami vivekananda famously said: 'I have a message to the West as Buddha had a message to the East.'1 It was this message that he kept on giving in various forms and hues and it is this message that resonates across the world even today though distanced by more than a century in time. There are numerous accounts of various talks, lectures, interviews, and other details of Swamiji hidden in some unknown recesses of this world, waiting to be read or heard by the world. During the last century, countless researchers have laboriously toiled day and night to unearth valuable bits of information regarding the life and message of Swamiji. One such information has surfaced during gleanings of American newspapers of the 1890s. It pertains to a lecture Swamiji gave in New York. We find mention of this lecture in his biography: 'In February and March [1895], he lectured twice on \"The Vedanta Philosophy\" at the home of a Mrs. A. L. Barber at 871 Fifth Avenue. These two lectures (to which the Swami referred in a letter as \"the Barbar House lectures\") constituted parts of a heterogeneous lecture series given under the auspices of Mrs. Ole Bull and were more or less private and Unpublished Lecture of Swami Vivekananda at the Barber's- Vedanta: The Soul Swami Narasimhananda invitational.'2 The letter referred to here was written to Mrs Ole Bull on 25 April 1895 from 54 W. 33rd Street, New York, where Swamiji says: 'The day before yesterday I received a kind note from Miss Farmer including a cheque for a hundred dollars for the Barbar House lectures.'3 We get further information of these lectures from Marie Louise Burke who quotes the programme from the 'Printed Barber House Announcement' obtained from the Sara Chapman Bull Papers: Sarah Farmer (1847–1916) PB July 2015478 Prabuddha Bharata44 Meanwhile, Swamiji had given other outside talks. There had been, for instance, the lecture course at the large house of Mr. and Mrs. Amzi Lorenzo Barber on Fifth Avenue at Sixtyeighth Street, which was sponsored by Mrs. Bull and which consisted of five lectures-two by Swamiji, two by Mrs. Florence Adams, and one by Mrs. Ernest Fenollosa, the well-known connoisseur and curator of Oriental art. Except for lending her spacious and, it was said, handsome drawing rooms for this series, Mrs. Barber seems to have had little to do with it. To judge from the following invitational announcement, it had been Miss Farmer and Miss Thursby who (in consultation with Mrs. Bull) had organized the series, and Mrs. Bull who presided over it: Three weeks spent at Greenacre, Eliot, Maine, during August, 1894, suggested to Mrs. Ole Bull of Cambridge, Mass., the benefit of lectures combined with classes. The success of these lectures given in December at Cambridge under her auspices led her to consent to preside over a similar course in New York. Through the courtesy of Mr. And Mrs. A. L. Barber, these lectures will be given at their residence, 871 Fifth Avenue. On receipt of an acceptance and five dollars (addressed to Miss Farmer, in care of Miss Emma Thursby, 34 Gramercy Park), a ticket of admission will be forwarded to those desiring to attend this course. A prompt response is requested, that the waiting list may be supplied. In connection with these lectures, classes and private lessons on the following subjects will be given. Those desiring to attend can arrange hours and terms with Miss Farmer. Classes may begin February 18. Mrs. Milward Adams: The Study of Expression. Miss Emma Thursby: Musical Expression and Phrasing. The Swami Vivekananda: The Vedanta Philosophy. program February 23, 8 p.m.-Mrs. Milward Adams of Chicago. Orderly Thought and Personal Culture. February 28, 3 p.m.-The Swami Vivekananda of India. The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul. March 4, 3 p.m.-Mrs. Milward Adams of Chicago. The Conversational Voice and its Possibilities. March 7, 8 p.m.-The Swami Vivekananda of India. The Vedanta Philosophy: God. March 9, 8 p.m.-Mr. Ernest F. Fenollosa of the Art Museum, Boston. Art as Related to Religion. Music: Miss Emma Thursby and Other Artists. 871 Fifth Avenue. According to a report in the social columns Sara Chapman Bull (1850–1911) 479PB July 2015 Unpublished Lecture of Swami Vivekananda at the Barber's- Vedanta: The Soul 45 of a New York newspaper, Mrs. Ole Bull, 'a delicate, sweet-voiced woman with a tender, dreamy face and masses of dark hair', introduced Mrs. Milward Adams to the audience. One can infer that she introduced Mr. Fenollosa and Swamiji as well, but this, together with the above announcement and program (which was repeated in part in the society news), is all we know at present about Swamiji's two 'Barber House' lectures, for which he received, almost two months after giving the second one, a check for $100 from Miss Farmer. As for the related classes and private lessons mentioned in the announcement, we have no further information about them.4 We find Pravrajika Prabuddhaprana, a biographer of Mrs. Ole Bull, mention about these lectures: In March, Sara organised a series of lectures at the home of Mrs. Barber on fashionable Fifth Avenue in New York, while Mrs. Barber was on occasion. The New York World reported on March 5 1985: 'The Conversational Voice and Its Possibilities' was the subject of the lecture given yesterday by Mrs. Milward Adams of Chicago, at the residence of Mrs. A. L. Barber, No.871 Fifth Avenue. The lecturer was introduced by Mrs. Ole Bull, who with Mrs. Emma Thursby and Miss Farmer, is managing a course of Lenten lectures. The Sunday Tribune reported on May 10: 'On Monday Mrs. Ole Bull, a delicate, sweetvoiced woman with a slender, dreamy face and masses of dark hair, introduced Mrs. Adams.' Mrs. Adams was a protégé of Emma's. At the Barber house lectures, Vivekananda met Miss Corbin, who invited him to give a parlour lecture at her house.5 Recently however, we have come across a hitherto unpublished newspaper account of the lecture 'The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul' that Swamiji gave on 28 February 1895. Asim Chaudhuri has something more to add about the lectures Swamiji gave at the Barber's: The New York Times did not bother to follow Swamiji's lectures, classes, and talks in the city on a regular basis, but they did on a few occasions. One such was the lecture course at the large house of Mr. and Mrs. Amzi Lorenzo Barber at 871 Fifth Avenue. (A new high-rise building bearing the numbers 871, 872, and 873 stands at the southeast corner of Sixty-eighth Street and Fifth Avenue where the Barber house once stood.) On February 28, the following announcement appeared in the New York Times: Lecture at Mr. and Mrs. Barber's.-Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Barber will hold the second [first one was by Mrs. Milward Adams of Chicago on February 23 titled: 'Orderly Thought and Personal Culture'] of their series of 'Afternoon and Evening Talks' at their home, 871 Fifth Avenue, this afternoon at 3 o'clock. The Swami Vivekananda of India will talk on 'The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul'. The remaining lectures will be: 'The Conversational Voice and Its Possibilities', by Mrs. Milward Adams of Chicago, Emma Thursby (1845–1931) PB July 2015480 Prabuddha Bharata46 on March 4; 'The Vedanta Philosophy: God', by the Swami Vivekananda of India on March 7; 'Art as Related to Religion', by Ernest F. Fenollosa of the Art Museum, Boston, on March 9. Tickets for the course may be had of Miss Emma Thursby of 34 Gramercy Park. On March 1, the New York Times published a short report on Swamiji's lecture: Lecture on Vedanta Philosophy-The second of Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Barber's series of 'Afternoon and Evening Talks' was held at their home, 871 Fifth Avenue, yesterday afternoon. The Swami Vivekananda of India was the lecturer, her [sic] subject being 'The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul'. The rooms and hall were filled with a large number of people interested in the lectures, which are under the management of Mrs. Ole Bull. Among those present were Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Lawton, Miss Emma Thursby, J. Baxter Upham, M. Banner, the Rev. Charles H. Eaton, Mrs. George B. Loring, Mrs. Mary Mapes Dodge, Mrs. Adams, Peter Marle, Mrs. Lanier, Dr. and Mrs. Philmore Moore, Mrs. Charles Lynde, and Miss Corbin. Miss Anthon sang, accompanied by James M. Wilson. On March 8, they had a still shorter report on Swamiji's March 7 lecture: The Vedanta Philosophy-The last lecture on 'The Vedanta Philosophy', by Swami Vivekananda of India, was given last evening at the home of Mrs. A. L. Barber, 871 Fifth Avenue. About 200 persons were present. Miss Thurston [Thursby?] sang several songs. Mrs. Barber has kindly given her parlors for Saturday night, when Ernest F. Fenollosa of the Boston Art Museum will talk on 'Art as Related to Science'. That must have been some parlor that accommodated 200 people! The size of the parlor, however, did not reflect the size of Mrs. Barber's heart. Two months after giving the 'Barber House' lectures, Swamiji received a check for meager $100 from Miss Farmer. At fifty cents per person per lecture, a reasonable charge for Fifth Avenue parlor talks, his two lectures there should have netted him $200. If Mrs. Bull hadn't managed the lecture series, one would think Mrs. Barber had pulled a 'Henry L. Slayton' on Swamiji.6 Of course, the reference here is to the owner of Slayton Lecture Bureau who had duped Swamiji and did not properly give him the proceeds of his many lectures conducted under a contract with them. Gopal Stavig gives further information regarding these lectures: 'A Universalist clergyman in New York City (1881–1902), Reverend Charles H. Eaton (1852–1902) attended Swamiji's discourse on \"The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul\" at Amzi Barber's home on February 28, 1895. The arrangements were made by Sara Bull.'7 He says further: 'After Swamiji came to New York City in 1895, Mary (Elizabeth) Mapes Dodge (1831– 1905) took an active interest in his classes. The New York Times (March 3, 1895, p. 8) mentions 481PB July 2015 Unpublished Lecture of Swami Vivekananda at the Barber's- Vedanta: The Soul 47 that she attended Vivekananda's class on the \"Vedanta Philosophy\", held at the residence of the wealthy Amzi Barber' (378). He adds: At the residence of the wealthy Amzi L. Barber, Miss Rose Anthon sang on the occasion of Vivekananda's talk on 'Vedanta Philosophy' before a high-class New York audience on February 28, 1895. This is probably the singing actress Rose Reinhardt Anthon. ... Also in attendance at Amzi Barber's house for Swamiji's talk was Baxter Upham (1820–1902), the president of the Boston Music Hall Association (1854–84), the chairman of the committee on music in the Boston Public Schools (1857–72), and the chairman of the Handel and Haydn Society (1860–70)'(456–7). Stavig gives detailed information about Amzi L Barber: Swamiji twice gave a talk as the guest speaker at the residence of Amzi Barber (1843–1909) on Fifth Avenue at Sixty-eighth Street in New York City. Sara Bull sponsored the event for February–March 1895. Amzi Lorenzo Barber, a man of a kindly disposition and indomitable energy, had been a professor of natural philosophy at the African American Howard University in Washington, D.C. for four years (1868–72). He later left that to enter into the business world. By 1896 Barber's Asphalt Company had laid one-half of the asphalt pavement in the United States. According to the New York Times, Emma Thursby, Mary Mapes Dodge, Florence Adams, and Miss Anna Corbin were present for the occasion at the wealthy Amzi Barber's house in New York City. Swami Vivekananda spoke on 'The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul' before a sizeable group of select people from various backgrounds. Also, in attendance at the Barber residence for Swamiji's talk were, according to the New York Times, the following people: Dr. Fillmore Moore (1856–1928), William Henry Lawton (b. 1853), and Peter Marie (1825–1903). Dr. Moore was a physician from New York who replaced Lewis Janes as the director of Monsalvat School -No bleed here- Swami Vivekananda's Lecture published in Newspaper 'The World' from New York on Friday, 1 March 1895. PB July 2015482 Prabuddha Bharata48 -No bleed here- 483PB July 2015 Unpublished Lecture of Swami Vivekananda at the Barber's- Vedanta: The Soul 49 of Comparative Religions during 1900–03. Before 1904 Moore was a lecturer at the Concord School of Philosophy and at Professor Davidson's School in Farmington, Connecticut, a trustee of the Greenacre Fellowship in Eliot, Maine, in 1911, and director of the Edgewood School in Greenwich, Connecticut (1919–25). William Henry Lawton was the four times publicly elected street commissioner and city engineer for the city of Newport, Rhode Island. Peter Marie was a wealthy New York art collector. When he died, two-hundred and eighty-six of Marie's miniature paintings (two-inch round of ivory), many of upper class women, became the property of the New York Historical Society (512–3). We find an announcement of this lecture in the New York Tribune of 24 February 1895: mrs. ole bull's lecture course A series of discourses, under the auspices of Mrs. Ole Bull, was begun last evening at the home of Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Barber, No. 871 Fifth-ave. The course will be continued as follows: February 28, 3 p.m., the Swami Vivekananda of India, 'The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul'; March 4, 3 p.m., Mrs. Milward Adams, of Chicago, 'The Conversational Voice and Its Possibilities'; March 7, 8 p.m., the Swami Vivekananda of India, 'The Vedanta Philosophy: God'; March 9, 8 p.m., Ernest F. Fenollosa, of the Art Museum, Boston, 'Art as Related to Religion'. In connection with these lectures, class and private lessons will be given by Mrs. Milward Adams, in the study of expression; by Miss Emma Thursby, musical expression and phrasing, and by the Swami Vivekananda, in the Vedanta philosophy.8 Another announcement of these lectures is found in the New York Herald of 24 February 1895: At the large mansion of Mrs. A. L. Barber, No. 871 Fifth avenue, will be given a series of afternoon and evening talks-the first of which began last evening-by Mrs. Milward Adams, of Chicago; the Swami Vivekananda, of India, and by Mr. Ernest F. Fenollosa, of the Art Museum, Boston. The subject of the second lecture, which will occur Thursday afternoon at three o'clock, will be the 'Vedanta Philosophy: Soul', delivered by Swami Vivekananda. The others occur March 4 at three o'clock, subject, 'The Conversational Voice and Its Possibilities', by Mrs. Milward Adams March 7. At eight o'clock, the 'Vedanta Philosophy: God'; March 7, at eight P. M., 'Art, as Related to Religion', by Mr. Fenollosa. Pleasant Incidentals will be music by Miss Emma Thursby, and others.9 At last, we have got an account of the lecture 'The Vedanta Philosophy: Soul' given on 28 February 1895 from The New York World: Lecture at Mrs. Barber's. The Swami Vivekanan's Talked [sic] on the Vedanta Philosophy. Mr. and Mrs. A. L. Barber entertained their friends yesterady [sic] at their home, No. 871 Fifth avenue, in a charming and unique manner. A lecture on the 'Vedanta Philosophy-Soul' was given by the Swami Vivekananda, of Calcutta, India, who first came into prominence as a representative of the Vedanta philosophy at the Congress of Religions at the World's Fair. After the singing of the French ballad, 'Esperance et Fol,' by Miss Anthon, the Swami Vivekananda was introduced in a graceful little speech by Mrs. Ole Bull, under whose auspices the lecture was given. The Swami, who is a high caste Brahmin, announced himself as not representing any one sect of religion, but as an exponent of 'Truth.' 'I have not come here,' he said, 'to preach any special religion, but to teach Truth. Zoroaster, Mahomet and Christ had no name for their doctrine. Each taught the grand truth of their age, of all ages, and left their followers to find a name for it, and the principal [sic] of truth is the same in all religions. -No bleed here- PB July 2015484 Prabuddha Bharata50 'I believe in a unity of all religions, and I also believe that the Vedanta Philosophy is broad enough to embrace all.' The Swami's definition of the soul is as follows: 'The soul is a circumference without beginning or end, whose centre is located in the body. The soul is naturally free, unbound, pure and perfect; but has, in some way, got bound to matter and thinks itself matter, and now requires many existences to free itself. It must go on evolving up or reverting back from birth to birth, from death to death, like a tiny boat in a tempest; now floating on the top of a wave, now battling in the trough of the sea, but at last reaching the harbor in safety. And this must go on until perfection is reached, when the soul bursts its bonds and is absorbed into the Supreme Godhead. 'When I speak of the Vedas,' the Swami continued, 'I do not wish to be understood as referring to just so many books; for the Vedas, in the most liberal sense, do not simply mean the 108 Hindoo books, but rather the accumulated treasury of all spiritual laws discovered by different men of different ages.' The Swami wore the native costume of bright scarlet and spoke in an earnest and impressive manner. Mrs. Barber wore a magnificent costume of violet velvet and silk and was assisted in receiving her guests by Mrs. Ole Bull and Miss Emma Thursby. Among those present were Mrs. E. E. L. Woodward of Chicago; Mrs. Underhill Johnson, the Rev. Robert Collyer, and Prof. Jane, President of the Ethical Society, of Brooklyn.10 This lecture resembles several others given by Swamiji in style and substance. A quotation that he often refers to and has been wrongly understood by many to be his own reads thus in original: 'God is a circle whose center is everywhere and circumference nowhere.' We get the details of the source of this quotation from a researcher: Empedocles (ca. 490–30 bc) was a Greek preSocratic philosopher ... The quote was first reference to Empedocles in the 14th century text Liber Hermetis, on the teachings of Hermes Treismegistus. God is a circle whose center is everywhere and circumference nowhere. 'Deus est circulus cuius centrum est ubique, circumferential vero nusquam.' In the form 'Deus est sphaera infinita' (God is an infinite sphere) also comes from the Liber Hermetis, Liber Termegisti, Cod. Paris. 6319 (14th cent.); Cod. Vat. 3060 (1315). The quotation is also attributed to Pascal, Voltaire, St. Augustine, Hermes Treismegistus, Nicholas Cusanus, Meister Eckhart and Carl Jung.11 Thus, we find the first detailed account of the lecture of Swamiji at the Barber's. P References 1. The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, 9 vols (Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1–8, 1989; 9, 1997), 5.314. 2. His Eastern and Western Disciples, The Life of Swami Vivekananda, 2 vols (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2008), 2.8. 3. Complete Works, 6.306. 4. Marie Louise Burke, Swami Vivekananda in the West: New Discoveries, 6 vols (Calcutta: Advaita Ashrama, 1985), 3.49–51. 5. Pravrajika Prabuddhaprana, Saint Sara: The Life of Sara Chapman Bull (Calcutta: Sri Sarada Math, 2002), 131–2. 6. Asim Chaudhuri, Swami Vivekananda in America: New Findings (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2008), 187–8. 7. Gopal Stavig, Western Admirers of Ramakrishna and His Disciples (Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama, 2010), 320. 8. <http://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/ sn83030214/1895-02-24/ed-1/seq-12/> ac- cessed 04 June 2015. 9. <http://tinyurl.com/nthafez> accessed 04 June 2015. 10. The New York World, 1 March 1895; <http://ti- nyurl.com/ojjwy2t> accessed 04 June 2015. 11. Rev. Margo Ruark, Where'd He Get That? (Illi- nois: The Peace Center, 2013), 172. -No bleed here-"}
{"meta": {"title": "Values of the Human Person. Contemporary challenges", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/book", "creator": "Mihaela, Pop", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "Contemporary knowledge is centered on the research on human\n          dimensions. Philosophy should particularly appeal to values in the process of understanding the human nature. The valuable “becoming” of each human person requires growing ever more aware of his/her personal identity and of his/her role in this lifetime. In ethics, especially, values suppose moral choices or criteria on which a moral behavior is based. Max Scheler based his ethical theory on the distinction between goods and values. The “goods” are things to which we attach some physical worth, and the “values” are the object of emotional perception, of the “sentiment of value” and of the place they have in the hierarchy of values. Even if the human being attributes a certain worth to individual things, he/she is always searching for a universal value, which should exceed the contingency of that thing. This universal validity is a kind of ideal measure of the value of all empiric realities and it is articulated by a normative rationality. It forms a system of universal norms that contribute to the foundation of critical axiological judgments. What values are the most enhanced by our post-modern society? Are they the same as during the modern period? What would distinguish them from the values of other cultural periods of humankind? How do we react to the new challenges generated by technological progress and the media? How do the classical disciplines such as philosophy, religion, anthropology, and art respond to these new challenges? And how could they help us to better adapt the writings of certain significant personalities to the modern and contemporary culture? These are only a few questions this volume will\n          address. It contains a large number of articles by authors from various\n          countries and continents: philosophers, and theologians, as well as\n          researchers in medicine, anthropology, and new scientific technologies. As the variety of topics is impressive, we tried to organize them into\n          three thematic parts: “Part I: Fundamental Human Values. Contemporary Challenging Globalization,” “Part II: New Axiological Challenges in Technologies and Scientific Thinking,” and “Part III: Cultural and Spiritual Personalities: Possible Answers to Our Contemporary Changes.” In the following pages, we shall make a short presentation of each article in order to facilitate a quick familiarization with the entire volume.", "date": "2014", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/MIHVOT", "language": "en", "datestamp": "2020-05-07T22:00:22Z"}, "text": "Cultural Heritage and Contemporary Change Series IVA. Eastern and Central European Philosophical Studies, Volume 47 General Editor George F. McLean Values of the Human Person: Contemporary Challenges Romanian Philosophical Studies, VIII Edited by Mihaela Pop The University of Bucharest The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy Copyright © 2013 by The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy Box 261 Cardinal Station Washington, D.C. 20064 All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Values of the human person : contemporary challenges / edited by Mihaela Pop. pages cm. -- (Cultural heritage and contemporary change. Series IVA, Eastern and Central European philosophical studies ; Volume 47) (Romanian philosophical studies ; 8) Includes bibliographical references and index. 1. Values. I. Pop, Mihaela, editor of compilation. BV232.V285 2013 2013013019 179'.9--dc23 CIP ISBN 978-1-56518-284-4 (pbk.) TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction Part I. Fundamental Human Values Challenging Contemporary Globalization Chapter 1. Value Differentiation and the Ideal of Mankind 25 Marin Aiftincă Chapter 2. The Values of the New Civilization 35 Bogdana Todorova Chapter 3. Humans in Contemporary Culture 43 Leon Dyczewski Chapter 4. Person and Personal Reality: The Actuality of 57 the Eastern Christian Understanding of Man Dan Chiţoiu Chapter 5. Modern Society and Its Ethical Dilemmas 65 Cornelia Găşpărel Chapter 6. Aspirations and Anticipations of Universalism: 81 The Global Village in Ancient Rome Iulian-Gabriel Hruşcă Chapter 7. Was the Modern Cosmopolis Transformed into 89 a Post-Modern Global Village? Constantin Stoenescu Chapter 8. Hermeneutic Dialogue as Social Value: An Inquiry 101 into the \"Undiscoverable Objects of thought\" Adrian Costache Chapter 9. Rationality as a Human Value 111 Lavinia Marin Chapter 10. Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 121 Sergey Nizhnikov Chapter 11. The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of 137 Contemporary Biopolitics Cristian Iftode Chapter 12. The Human Value of Civil Disobedience 159 in Democratic Societies Dorina Pătrunsu Chapter 13. Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 167 Mihaela Pop Chapter 14. What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 185 Ulrich Steinvorth Chapter 15. Globalization: Modern Myth or Ideological Project? 203 Iulia Anghel Part II. New Axiological Challenges in Technologies and Scientific Thinking Chapter 16. Human Being – from Spiritual Values to 213 Technological Progress Cristian Berţi Chapter 17. Human Worth on the Threshold of 221 Its Technological Transformation Ana Bazac Chapter 18. Social Network Sites: A Microanalysis of 241 the Involvement of Young Europeans Sebastian Chirimbu Chapter 19. Philosophical Reflection on the Ethics of 249 Network Information Gong Qun Chapter 20. The Disunity of Anthropology: Reflections from 261 a Philosophy of Science Perspective Richard-David Rus Chapter 21. The Concept of Dignity in the Capability Approach: 273 A Personalist Perspective Asya Markova Chapter 22. Understanding Mental Health: Existential Situation 281 and Social Attitude Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian, Manea Teodora Chapter 23. Changes and Challenges in Statements on 295 the Quality of Dying Gabriel Roman Part III. Cultural and Spiritual Personalities: Possible Answers to Our Contemporary Changes Chapter 24. Rousseau's \"Civil Religion\" Reconsidered 315 John Farina Chapter 25. The Authenticity of the Human Being in 327 Christian Existentialism and Phenomenology: S. Kierkegaard and J. Tischner Marek Jan Pytko Chapter 26. The Value of the Human Person: Rabindranath Tagore's 339 Relevance to the Challenges of Today's World Seema Bose Chapter 27. The Acting Person and the Experience of 345 Vertical Transcendence in Karol Wojtyla's Writings Wilhelm Dancă Chapter 28. Defining Human Dignity: Landmarks in 351 the Thought of Pope Benedict XVI Tarciziu Şerban Chapter 29. Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy: 359 Awakening and Awareness Magdalena Dumitrana Chapter 30. The Human Person between Transcendence and Fault: 373 a Philosophical Perspective Cătălin Bobb Chapter 31. Foucault's Case Against Humanism 383 Maria Gioga Index\n\nINTRODUCTION MIHAELA POP Contemporary knowledge is centered on the research on human dimensions. Philosophy should particularly appeal to values in the process of understanding the human nature. The valuable \"becoming\" of each human person requires growing ever more aware of his/her personal identity and of his/her role in this lifetime. In ethics, especially, values suppose moral choices or criteria on which a moral behavior is based. Max Scheler based his ethical theory on the distinction between goods and values. The \"goods\" are things to which we attach some physical worth, and the \"values\" are the object of emotional perception, of the \"sentiment of value\" and of the place they have in the hierarchy of values. Even if the human being attributes a certain worth to individual things, he/she is always searching for a universal value, which should exceed the contingency of that thing. This universal validity is a kind of ideal measure of the value of all empiric realities and it is articulated by a normative rationality. It forms a system of universal norms that contribute to the foundation of critical axiological judgments. Heinrich Rickert was a philosopher who considered that the entire human existence should be divided into three areas: reality, values, and meaning. The reality is the object of science; the knowing subject belongs to the area of meanings, and he is the connecting element between reality and values. These do not physically exist, but they make valorization possible. Within the concrete process of valorization the human being as assessing subject succeeds in connecting the two other areas. Friedrich Nietzsche was among the most revolutionary philosophers. He used an applied critique to the traditional morality, having the intention to reconsider all values. There are voices who claim that, even today, the echoes of his critical thinking are still heard. The phenomenon of globalization has stirred up an entire process of challenges and changes, not only within the technological and industrial universe, but also, and more importantly, within the world of spiritual and cultural achievements. What values are the most enhanced by our post-modern society? Are they the same as during the modern period? What would distinguish them from the values of other cultural periods of humankind? How do we react to the new challenges generated by technological progress and the media? How do the classical disciplines such as philosophy, religion, anthropology, and art respond to these new challenges? And how could they help us to better adapt the writings of certain significant personalities to the modern and contemporary culture? These are only a few questions this volume will address. It contains a large number of articles by authors from various countries and continents: philosophers, and theologians, as well as researchers in medicine, anthropology, and new scientific technologies. 2 Mihaela Pop They convened in Bucharest, Romania an international conference entitled \"Values of the Human Person: Contemporary Challenges.\" As the variety of topics is impressive, we tried to organize them into three thematic parts: \"Part I: Fundamental Human Values. Contemporary Challenging Globalization,\" \"Part II: New Axiological Challenges in Technologies and Scientific Thinking,\" and \"Part III: Cultural and Spiritual Personalities: Possible Answers to Our Contemporary Changes.\" In the following pages, we shall make a short presentation of each article in order to facilitate a quick familiarization with the entire volume. Part I. Fundamental Human Values Challenging Contemporary Globalization Chapter 1, \"Value Differentiation and the Ideal of Mankind\", by Marin Aiftincă, identifies and discusses some fundamental theoretical aspects of the concept of value and its meanings. The relationship between personal values and common values in a strict connection with the ideal of humanity is the main topic of the article. The author starts from the thesis that the human being is essentially determined by his spirit, and he identifies himself through a set of values which he freely appropriates in connection with his own tradition, cognition, and aspirations. The distinction between personal and common values is considered to be significant. It takes various forms of expression due to the development of human knowledge and under the pressure of socio-political events. There is another significant distinction to be made: between the pure value and the embodied one. The latter shows itself together with its bearer and at the level of experience. Hence a person is, according to Aiftinca, the bearer of values. As a consequence, personal values embody themselves in a person without exausting their content and their universality. But a person is also a member of a community, and he becomes a responsible person by being educated within a certain axiological universe – that belonging to his community. There is, however, at this level a conflict of values that explains the crisis of the contemporary culture. The author considers that at present, the globalization process promotes and imposes the utilitarian values that feed the conflict between values, which is detrimental to the spiritual nature of the individual and collective person. Instead of the personal values that belong to the local or national cultural tradition, there are other ideas and values which are gradually brought under the pressure of globalization, such as liberty, equality, democracy, justice, market economy, and environmental protection. Those who criticize globalization accuse it of having dangerous effects on both individual and community. Being a source of different discontents and conflicts, globalization is experienced in everyday life as uncertainty and anxiety, making people vulnerable to various tyrannies and cults. It also implies migration of capital and job loss, the distress of local wars and religious collisions, the split of societies into groups involved in ruinous Introduction 3 struggles. All of these have a negative influence on the structure of individual and collective values, giving way to the temptation of embracing non-values. Finally, the author pleads in favor of the preservation of the balance between personal and common values; the universal culture must be led by the ideal of the individual person's self-improvement. Chapter 2, \"The Values of the New Civilization,\" by Bogdana Todorova, remarks that our times, characterized by new forms of democracy, demand new solutions to contemporary challenges. The author explores the possibility of a synthesis of values belonging to different cultures, social groups, and types of intellectual praxis, and how an interaction between science and religion could be possible and useful in achieving this synthesis. This relationship has been changeable during history. An extremely unclear opposition between West and East was characteristic for Europe in the past and this pattern seems to extend today into the entire world. Making a historical review, the author establishes three main periods of the development of this relationship between religion and science: first, the traditional one, based on the Christian religious understanding of nature; second, the technological period, where nature is seen as a specific field of human manifestations; and third, the new civilizational and \"post-neoclassical type of rationality related to complex developing systems possessing synergetic features.\" This new type can be considered a medium for the development of new values. In the author's opinion, it is evident that this general course of civilizational changes could influence the axiological system of various cultures, though she has doubts about the possibility of such changes within the Christian religion. In her effort to discover new aspects of cultural universals that could assure a desired synthesis, the author mentions the global ecologism – \"a good example of how new cultural universals emerge.\" The thought combines Buddhism, Jainism, and Hinduism, and the neo-Darwinist synthesis in the twentieth century becomes its secular variant. Another fundamental perspective is the anthropic one which is associated with Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. It was secularized, especially during the nineteenth century, identifying social sciences as humanistic religions. Believing that these two ways of thinking should not be opposed, but should be reunited by a philosophical synthesis, Todorova pleads for the contribution of philosophy to adopt a critical analysis and also apply the principle of complementarity. Chapter 3 is an effort to identify the cultural coordinates of the human being in contemporary society. Leon Dyczewski, in his article \"Man in Contemporary Culture,\" starts from the idea that the development of any society depends on creative individuals. Hence, the more such individuals there are, the more they are open to new problems, and the more quickly they enter new fields of life, the better. Contemporary society is marked by an increasing pluralism and differentiation in all fields of life, and by a rapid absorption of modern technologies. Mass culture is driven out by popular culture that abolishes the division into high and low culture, 4 Mihaela Pop forming a great mosaic of cultural groups. The author supports the idea that in our contemporary society a new social class or layer is slowly formed: the creative layer. In the future, it is this class that will shape our world. Thus, the author discusses some of the main characteristics of this creative class. It may be called technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia and differs significantly from the Renaissance model promoted by what was usually called the intelligentsia in Poland and Russia. It focused on values significant for the whole individual and social life, and generally its members were very well educated. To the contrary, the technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia is formed by those who can easily shape the sphere of possessions, who can recognize human needs and satisfy them with new products, ideas, and behavior patterns. Unfortunately, this new class promotes a certain culture that could become dangerous, not only for individuals or small groups, but also for entire nations or even the whole world. Despite the ever greater knowledge of oneself and of the surrounding world, fascination of new inventions leads to forgetfulness about man himself and leads to a deep crisis of culture. The technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia is not able to think about the human being as a spiritual-bodily whole, nor about man's ultimate aims or the meaning of his life. Hence, Dyczewski thinks that the time has come for a new shaping of European society. Holistic theories are quite popular today and there is a growing demand for spiritual life and for deep personal ties. The supporters of this movement may be called the intelligentsia of life. The two categories of intelligentsia are not necessarily opposed. Both are necessary and form the creative class of our contemporary society. Chapter 4 has a wide range of theoretical debates trying to get general characteristics of a contemporary axiological perspective. Dan Chiţoiu in his article \"Person and Personal Reality: The Actuality of the Eastern Christian Understanding of Man,\" proposes a special religious perspective. Contemporary science has succeeded in explaining many biological or physical processes so that we begin to have a consistent understanding of subtle interactions between body and mind. After Descartes, philosophers preferred the concept of mind, the human dimension understood as possessing self-reflexivity and intentionality. The old notion of soul was replaced by mind and starting from the assertion that thinking is an act of mind, a new domain of philosophy appeared during the twentieth century, the philosophy of mind. Man is described in a double sense: first, mind could not be understood as an intangible or incorporeal nature; second, mind can not have other support than body; experiments in neuroscience provided strong evidence of the material support of the mind. Psychology, in its turn, affirms that the soul cannot be an object of study in any way – even indirectly; instead it deals with the description of cognitive processes, the nature of emotions, etc. These developments bring, inevitably, a crisis in the process of understanding the nature of man. During the last half of the twentieth century, some other theories proposed Introduction 5 to respond to this need. French phenomenology abandoned the search for a human essence in favor of a radical phenomenality. What characterizes the life of man is not the biological instinct, but his power to test himself. This is based on a distinction between body (corps) and flesh (chair). Similar explanatory insight can be found in the texts of authors involved in the neoPatristic movement: Gheorghi Florovsky, Justin Popovici, and Dumitru Stăniloae. They promoted a re-interpretation of the Gospel, as well as some texts of the Church Fathers to revive thereby the spirit of the first Christian textual sources. Since the Renaissance, the Christian anthropological perspective was considered to have been under influences not related to the tradition of the Fathers. This was valid not only for the Christian West, but even for Eastern Christianity. Some notions, such as persona, prosopon, and hypostasis, had slightly different meanings for the Church Fathers of the fourth century, and those meanings should now be reactivated. Chapter 5, \"Modern Society and Its Ethical Dilemmas,\" by Cornelia Găşpărel, suggests that society does not look perfect, but it has its dilemmas. The author tries to find solutions to these dilemmas. The starting point of the article is the present situation in Romania. Despite the emergence of new human rights after the end of the communist system, codes of conduct within the Romanian society seem to remain unchanged. Institutions that are supposed to create and apply the new rights are still tributary to traditional interpretations. As a consequence, the notion of ethics is often misunderstood, due to limitations on action and interpretation. While contextuality can be a solution to some of the ethical dilemmas, it is not satisfactory for a logical system of analysis. On the other hand, such modes of philosophical analysis as utilitarianism, consequentialism, or professional ethics are only a descriptive level. In conclusion, the author proposes setting a new direction of research built on psycho-philosophical coordinates focusing on the philosophical, hereditary, and neurological unconscious. She pleads in favor of repositioning and analysing the theories concerning the fact that the unconscious level has an incipient conscient life considered as a starting point (in terms of moral and spiritual virtues). Then, the following aspect would be the role of memory, which may or may not indicate the resources of will. In other words, Gasparel wants to point out a different perspective on scientific and applied ethics. Choosing this way of thinking, the author intends to enhance morality by reconsidering the ontological structure (conscience) which may or may not justify the equity in human relations. Chapter 6, \"Aspirations and Anticipations of Universalism: The Global Village in Ancient Rome,\" by Iulian-Gabriel Hruşcă, attempts to find solutions to today's crises and proposes that looking back in history could help to a better understanding. Hruşcă points out that the phenomenon of globalization is not just a modern one; it can be seen in the Roman tradition. There is one huge difference: the expansion of technology and communications, greatly enlarging the scale at which the contemporary globalization takes place. On the level of community moral attitudes, the 6 Mihaela Pop author points out some of today's main notions that seem to be inherited from the ancient Rome. The modern notion of global village/globalization can be attributed to the Roman tradition, claims Hruşcă, even if the twentieth century seems to have invented it through Marshal McLuhan's theory. The author mentions that the ancient Greek civilization invented terms such as philanthropia, which meant \"goodwill toward all men,\" and promoted a moral obligation owed by every human being to every other one. The Roman equivalent of the Greek philanthropia was the concept of humanitas Romana. Despite the adverse impact that Rome must have had on other ethnic groups, it remained to posterity as the great exponent of multiculturalism. Other Roman notions analyzed by the author are civitas, anticivitas, transcivitas, and imperium. Hruşcă suggests that a deeper analysis of the Roman civilization could be helpful for a better understanding of today's process of globalization. Chapter 7, \"Was the Modern Cosmopolis Transformed into a PostModern Global Village?,\" by Constantin Stoenescu, develops, in a different way, the concept of global village. The author argues that the shift from Modernity to Post-Modernity was accompanied by a deep change of some presuppositions. He reveals that post-modernity replaces the so-called project of Cosmopolis with that of a global village. Stoenescu thinks that globalization should be considered the end of modernity, but not of history itself. This means in the author's opinion, that the old Kantian ideal about a common peaceful world was already fulfilled. This historical project was the basis of the modern society with the national state as a unit of global order. But the technological evolution and the market economy changed the society and the national state became something old-fashioned. The new aim is a global order based on transnational processes, and the brave new world looks like a village, a global village in which every person can know almost everything, if she or he wants, about everybody and everything. The author remarks that post-modernism, in its first phase, was a particular movement and had the main purpose of stopping and overcoming the modernism in architecture; it wasn't its aim to replace modernity with something like postmodernity. Later on, post-modernism undermined the authority of modern tradition and institutions. The idea of universality was under attack, as the new preferred approaches were deconstruction and the analysis of little fragments. All the strong modern claims for objectivity and universalism were put into question by post-modernism. The author remarks that surprisingly, a difference between what we wanted to build and what we have in fact built began to manifest itself. The main reason for this surprising result is the invasion of a new kind of subjectivity in all areas of social life, thinks Stoenescu. And he mentions that there is a new agenda in which some trends, philosophically supported, could be seen as a revival of culture, such as the return to the oral tradition or to the particular and to the local community. In the author's opinion, there is a way to unify and save all these revivals: to rediscover nature and to overcome the modern Introduction 7 dichotomy between nature and culture. The global village could be redesigned starting from the natural dimensions of our life on our planet. Chapter 8, \"Hermeneutic Dialogue as Social Value: An Inquiry into the 'Unfindable Objects of Thought',\" by Adrian Costache, notes that another characteristic of the new society should be the hermeneutic dialogue. Costache identifies some meaningful areas of dialogue: in institutions of education and the sciences of education, where dialogue is seen as the prominent means for passing on knowledge and for the development of a harmonious personality, and in international relations and cultural studies, where dialogue, as cross-cultural conversation, is taken as the only means for facing and avoiding the perils confronting humanity as a whole in our times. The author supposes that dialogue is as old as human society itself; there is no society but through dialogue, nor can there be dialogue outside a certain sociality. The \"dynamic genesis\" of dialogue understood simply as an exchange of ideas or views about a matter at hand between an \"I\" and a \"Thou\" allows that dialogue is not only a value in and for our society, but the social value par excellence. A dialogue presupposes the existence of a third person. It involves a third for only with the appearance of the third and through the third is the other seen as another \"I,\" and thus as a \"Thou.\" The third brings about and embodies the law that institutes and governs all possible and acceptable relations between human beings. It is suggested that we must give up our obsession with the question of being, and renounce any philosophy of being altogether, in favor of a philosophy of multiplicity, of the \"and.\" We have to learn how to think not in terms of what \"is\" this or that, and not out of the wonder that there \"is\" something rather than nothing, but in terms of this and that and that and...Such metaphysics of the \"and\" will lead us to realize that the speaking subject and the \"I\" that engages a \"Thou\" in dialogue (just like the \"Thou\") is not the substratum of the world or a transcendental condition of possibility. Rather, the speaking subject is a collective assemblage for enunciation through whose speech a multiplicity of order-words is expressed. Hence also we will have to stop attributing to language and discourse (either written or spoken) any privilege. Instead, we will have finally to understand that although the flow of words is the only one to have meaning, it has just as much or as little sense as any other flow. Chapter 9, \"Rationality as a Human Value,\" by Lavinia Marin, proves another fundamental value of today's society rationality to be. Living today in big cities induces people to interact with other people belonging to different cultures. Problems arise when there are differences of education, generating misunderstandings and difficulties of communication. Marin thinks that this situation can also cause a philosophical problem as it expresses the need to reevaluate one's own values and attitudes toward the others. In fact, each one should understand that his own values are for him as valuable as are the values of some other people for them. The author 8 Mihaela Pop wants to find an answer to some questions, such as: \"How are we supposed to talk in public about our own values? How are we to negotiate our values in a multicultural society?\" The author establishes that there are two kinds of values: communitarian and individual. There are also intrinsic values and instrumental ones. Two main attitudes of defending values can be mentioned: being irrational when choosing values but defending them in a rational way, and being rational about our values yet being fanatical about them and refusing any type of dialogue. The author goes on analyzing various solutions in order to adopt a rational attitude when defending a value. A solution with which the author seems to sympathize is the Contractualism version promoted by T.M. Scanlon. Finally, in order to put to work the theories already mentioned, Marin chooses two cases: the smoking ban imposed by the state on the citizens and the recent controversy regarding the wearing of the Islamic veil in France – l'affaire du voile. Chapter 10, \"Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture,\" by Sergey Nizhnikov, thinks that not only rationality should be considered a fundamental value of our days, but also spiritual cognition. In today's society, people seem to lose some of the spiritual values of the cultural tradition. Spiritual knowledge is considered as the essence of an individual, enabling him to use and display the human spiritual archetypes. The author stresses the fact that these archetypes become manifest in individual lives only when each person becomes aware of this heritage and makes it his own. Nizhnikov wants to achieve an extended image of the spiritual problematic not only from the individual side but also from a socio-cultural and historical point of view. Thus, the author uses not only European philosophy, but also spiritual theories belonging to various cultures and traditions of the world. He treats spirituality in connection with culture, knowledge, morals, and mysticism. The spiritual person is anxious for moral purification in order to reach the perfection of his nature. The author remarks that a person should be aware of the fact that he is in an on-going process of becoming from the spiritual point of view. Being a spiritual person is not a static dimension but a dynamic one, based on a self-knowing process. The purpose would be a deification of the human being as a consequence of this lifelong process of spiritual becoming. The hesychastic theological movement theorized by Gregory Palamas during the fourteenth century is one of the ways to reach this desired condition. Christ, Buddha, and Plato managed to understand the spiritual essence of a person in the world and to express it in symbols and concepts. As spiritual knowledge concerns what the person is in his essence, spiritual truth is he himself. When this essence of a person is completely developed, the spiritual archetype of humankind reveals itself in an individual appearance, says the author. Chapter 11, \"The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics,\" by Cristian Iftode, points out the role of philosophical thinking as extremely necessary in our contemporary society. Today, philosophy tends to revive the ancient formula of philosophy as \"a way of life\" or \"care Introduction 9 of the self,\" says the author. He wants to debate the ends of philosophy in the context of today's culture and thinks that the radical critique of modern subjectivity could be a guiding thread for the understanding of all the relevant issues in contemporary (post-Nietzschean) philosophy. The author notices an important philosophical and cultural phenomenon in the West since the beginning of the 80s: the death of the \"death of the subject\" and the practical turn in contemporary philosophy. This return of the subject as an action subject could be considered at the same time a principle of practical reflexivity and the result of a process of subjectivation. The author points out three levels of resistance to the idea of philosophy as a practice aimed to perform an effective transformation of its subject: the prevailing socio-cultural context, so favorable to the idea of self-acceptance; the tradition of modern moral philosophy, bracketing the very meaning of ethics as an \"ascetic\" work whose goal is the self-fashioning of the individual; and some of the influential trends in the field of contemporary moral psychology. Iftode presents then three aporias that illustrate philosophy as a \"form of life\" and define the \"condition\" of any philosopher: (a) disinterested contemplation vs. existential practice; (b) Socratic-Nietzschean unsettlement vs. full embrace of a philosophy of life; (c) self-creation vs. self-discovery. In the end, the author emphasizes the present ethical and political relevance of the practice of philosophy, both on a personal, or rather interpersonal, level, with the goal of selftransformation, and on a public level, with the task of a consistently critical approach to all forms of disciplinary power. Chapter 12, \"The Human Value of Civil Disobedience in Democratic Societies,\" by Dorina Pătrunsu, points out that there are not only positive values which characterize our society but also negative ones that could be positively re-used. Pătrunsu starts from the assertion that the role played by an individual within a democratic society depends on the limits within which the individual may freely interact with the other members of the society. Democratization supposes a social space where institutional structures provide individuals equality in opportunities and the same degree of liberty. Nevertheless, in real life, democratic societies have to face cases where certain rules fail to impose the same constraints to each individual, acting systematically to the disadvantage of some of them. In such cases, the people against whom the discrimination occurs are frustrated. This is one of the reasons that civil protests are supposed to play a crucial role in the process of self-regulation and self-correcting of the institutional structure. Civil disobedience becomes consequently a means for the improvement of the institutional system. This means that in a case where some group of citizens is systematically oppressed, that is, where some of their basic liberties are denied by some of the existing laws, the civil majority, if well-informed about the injustice, would be ready to put pressure on their political representatives to amend the system of laws. Pătrunsu develops some well-known theories and analyzes some cases of civil disobedience. She mentions the fundamental steps in the development 10 Mihaela Pop of a disobedient civic movement. Her purpose is to justify the civil disobedience. Chapter 13, \"Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges,\" by Mihaela Pop, suggests the aesthetic values as a side of the contemporary human person and fundamental inquiries. Pop pleads a subtle continuity of classical aesthetic values \"dressed\" in new appearances. The avant-gardes and especially the Dada movement generated a real revolution in the artistic world, not only at the theoretical level, but also in the manner of making artistic works. Aesthetic thought was called to answer to extremely courageous and shocking questions as the artists were exploring new ways of artistic expression. Theoretical principles, themes, methods of artistic work, materials – all were reconsidered. Was it \"the end of art\" already prophesized by Hegel? And what was going to happen after the end of art? And artistic beauty – was it yet a value for the new kind of art that Duchamp initiated? These are questions to which the author of this article tries to give some coherent answers. After a short presentation of the avantgarde movements and their main characteristics, Pop uses some significant aesthetic theories and their arguments in order to prove the fact that beauty is not only a historical aesthetic value, it is a fundamental human value that always finds its expression in accordance with the cultural context of the moment. In order to be more pertinent in her analysis, the author chose two artists whose works could illustrate this position. Chapter 14, \"What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time,\" by Ulrich Steinvorth, analyzes the negative aspect of kitsch and its various ways of manifestation. Steinvorth develops some significant ideas, pointing especially to some non-aesthetic meanings of the term. Modern kitsch is the new opium, disabling the reality contact necessary for rational action. There were two main meanings the twentieth century attributed to this term: an intellectual one and a political one, thinks the author. While the first half of the century criticized especially the intellectual dimension, during the Second World War and the second half of the century the political aspects were preponderant. In either of these, the kitsch phenomenon overlooked the aesthetic dimension. The author starts from one of the well-known definitions of kitsch as \"bad taste\" and \"reality sweetener,\" a definition that proves to be unsatisfactory, in his opinion. Thus, he explores an alternative. The author thinks that \"bad taste is not a lack of knowledge or morality, but a lack of sense,\" or its \"misplacement.\" Kitsch would suppose a kind of second emotion by which we think we have the same feelings as the entire world, and this emotion, which is not, in fact, a very profound and personal one, would be responsible for kitsch behavior. Indulging kitsch feelings supposes indulging our conformity to others. The author points out that kitsch obliterates the need for deliberation, or in other words, for any assessing judgment. Thus, people's will is annihilated and they have only a false impression of giving their consent by argument. Kitsch becomes, therefore, a powerful tool in politics, advertisement, religion, and rhetoric. The conclusion would be that kitsch should not be reduced to \"bad taste\" Introduction 11 and \"reality sweetener.\" It blocks rational deliberation, which should assure freedom of thinking and autonomy; it prevents differentiated responses to stimuli. In art, a work turns into kitsch \"not if it moves or pleases, but if it does so by preventing differentiation.\" Chapter 15, \"Globalization, Modern Myth or Ideological Project?,\" by Iulia Anghel, suggests differentiation another fundamental characteristic. Anghel intends to explore the real limits of globalization and to show some hidden aspects of it. Its fundamental characteristic would be the fact that it is defined by a core of values that tend to minimize other solutions. Even if globalization is usually considered a progressive and legitimate evolution of a universal project, there is still the possibility of the intervention of an ideological frame. In this situation, globalization becomes an expression of a quiet dominance of a pattern against diversity, not an \"open model.\" The author analyzes some other historical projects of globalization: Christianity, the Medieval Ages, the Enlightment, and communist theory and its regimes. The general characteristic present in any of these historical periods is the fact that the unification trends are supporting a dissolving element. In another chapter of her article, Anghel wonders whether the globalization process should be understood as a liberalization movement or as a totalitarian model. She mentions that there is a core of \"good\" values that are replacing some \"dark paradigms\" such as totalitarianism or archaic structures. But the real problem remains. She tries to highlight that there is the non-legitimate tendency of selection of interest spheres that must melt in the project. Finally, the author expresses a critical and not very optimistic attitude: \"Maybe the Western cultural pattern is a good one and its extension is a sign of evolution, but the lack of permeability of this model and its monopolizing tendencies are proofs of a profound internal crisis. Maybe the border will continue to extend, but its eliminatory vocation remains constant.\" Part II. New Axiological Challenges in Technologies and Scientific Thinking Chapter 16, \"Human Being: from Spiritual Values to Technological Progress,\" by Cristian Berţi, debates the meaning of the human being today, his role and his expectations within the progress of knowledge. Berţi presents the opinions of three philosophers of the twentieth century: Constantin Noica, Werner Jaeger, and José Ortega y Gasset. The common characteristic of these three philosophers is the fact that they discussed the problems of the human being through history and tried to articulate a profile of the human being of the twenty-first century. In the author's opinion, this profile is very close to our contemporary image. In order to understand the future of the human being, the author thinks that a deep understanding of the past is strictly necessary. The three philosophers mentioned above adopted the same attitude. Noica thought that modern man is focused on finding the truth, but forgets about the moral attitude and the struggle for 12 Mihaela Pop the common good of the community. A return to the Christian commandments that make people more oriented toward the Other would be, in Noica's opinion, a good attitude for the future. Jaeger brings another, complementary idea: the education of contemporary man should be inspired from the Greek paideia, which was capable of building a humanist human being. Ortega y Gasset thought that the human being should look toward the future. This is what is lacking in contemporary man. Ortega y Gasset pleads in favor of an industrious and active man. Berti adds some ideas of Ernst Cassirer, pointing out that the essence of the human being doesn't consist in the search for his unity, but rather in the discovery of new sides, of new ways of being. The author is convinced that the greatest quality of the human being is the fact that he is able to adapt to the changes in his life. This ability will help him even during this epoch of great technological changes; he will be able to reshape his values. Chatper 17, \"The Worth of Man on the Threshold of his Technological Transformation,\" by Ana Bazac, discusses an important contemporary theme: are the new technologies already functioning in medicine and medical engineering capable of modifying the biological functions of the human being in order to ameliorate him, not only biologically, but also qualitatively? The author is much more interested in other kinds of changes, those specific to the human mind. The consequences would be that the \"new\" human being, the technological one, would transform his specific meanings. The author wants to find out whether these new values are or not human at all. Bazac thinks that the new mind – natural plus AI – will generate a new kind of sapiens sapiens, who would also be named posthuman or trans-human. Wondering on what level human society now is, the author mentions the predominance of capital as the unique manager of the right to existence, and even of whatever is the possible future. The author mentions that the article is based on the theory of engineered singularity and its ideological significance: as technophile optimism, transfiguring a deep social pessimism concerning the possible solving of the global problems by the present \"natural\" human being. Thus the ontological view developed by Bazac concerns a twofold problematic: the presumable consequences of AI technology on the human being, and the social use of the present revolutionary science and engineering. The results of these two kinds of situations reveal a contradictory state of man: on one side is the fact that he is a rational being, and on the other, it shows the weakness of human reason and the social translation of this weakness, which generates a waste of human capabilities and lives. Chapter 18, \"Social Network Sites: A Microanalysis of the Involvement of Young Europeans,\" by Sebastian Chirimbu, focuses on a highly specific domain of our society, the internet. Chirimbu points out that the development of the internet depended, obviously, on technology. It is the most outstanding process of development of the end of the twentieth Introduction 13 century. Since its beginnings, the internet has been generating continuous new consequences for our contemporary society. One of them is the process of globalization. The internet is the result of the process of collaboration among people, institutions, groups, and states. As the author points out, the internet produced the most interesting phenomenon of the twentieth century: communication in real time all over the world. Practically speaking, the social networks hosted by the internet represent a global way of communication. Social networks appear to be interaction structures among users in an exchange relationship, with the nature of the network being given by the nature of the relationship. There are many channels of communication via internet. Chirimbu chooses Facebook as an example. Besides being anything else, Facebook is an agent of globalization, and due to it the global village we live in becomes virtually coherent in the infosphere. It is well known that Facebook was initially a system of communication among students. This makes the author question the situation of the young generations in today's society. European youth have witnessed and have been living in a fast-changing, fast-developing environment. It is a generation whose thinking patterns are fundamentally different from those of previous generations, mostly due to the different way of processing information in a time of technological boom. The author thinks that the young generation does not have enough access to the leading positions within the EU and this could cause social tensions. Chapter 19, \"Philosophical Reflection as to the Ethics of Network Information,\" by Gong Qun, manifests his interest for the same domain of network information considered from the ethics perspective. The author starts with the assertion that our contemporary life is based on information and especially on network facilities. This has already changed man's living and communication styles. We can see that this fact has also changed the characteristics of human ethical life, as it grows more evident that \"net crimes\" are a new section of human behavior. This article presents some theoretical philosophical premises and relevant principles of the ethics of network information. The change of identity of the network user is the ontological premise of this ethical discussion. \"Without any constraint mechanism, all those presumed to be seeking for maximum self-interest are just like the natural men in natural state mentioned by Hobbes. In such an anonymous space, every one is free and equal, and will never balk at hurting others for the maximization of his selfinterest,\" says Gong Qun. Thus, in the author's opinion, the contractarianism of Hobbes and Gauthier can be considered the philosophical premise for the ethics of network information. This supposes that all participants in the network are of identical purpose of self-interest when partaking in the activities and construction of this world. The author thinks that the construction of a network ethic on the basis of restrictive pursuit of self-interest conceives a social contract among \"Netizens.\" He is perfectly aware of the fact that there are people who care for others, even sacrifice themselves for others. They have the capacity for better realizing 14 Mihaela Pop self-restraint. However, people mostly pursue only their self-interest. Thus, the premise of the new ethic should be based on the expectation that people have the idea of justice by nature as it was mentioned by Rawls. That is, having a reasonable conception of self-good, people may accept an ethical behavior in the net world as the product of man's pursuit for a better life. Chapter 20, \"The Disunity of Anthropology: Reflections from a Philosophy of Science Perspective\" by Richard David-Rus, notes another scientific perspective on our society and its challenges developed by anthropological research. The author tries to apply a philosophical enquiry to raise the issues of the relation between the biological and the social approaches to human nature and intends to address these problems from the perspective of philosophy and methodology of science. The subject of the unity of the sciences was a major topic in the classical neopositivist conception of science. O. Neurath and R. Carnap were behind the project of an encyclopedia of unified science. After presenting the traditional view and assessing its inadequacy for the question of unity of anthropology, the author explores some recent modalities of approaching the issue. The first one places it in a Hempelian frame regarding anthropology as a homothetic science. The second one takes into account the historicist reaction to the DN model, and sees anthropology as mainly dealing with particular sorts of statements, without aiming at discovering general laws. The third orientation draws on the ideas that understanding in social sciences is different from that in natural sciences. The task of the anthropologist is to make sense of the behavior of an individual people by contextualizing the behavior in the frame of the purposes, motives, beliefs, and norms of behavior of that people. Starting with the last two decades of the twentieth century, a new move can be detected. It was described as \"localism,\" with reference to the positions articulated in the realism-antirealism debate. Regarding the anthropological investigation, David-Rus thinks that the actual situation does not imply that questions regarding human nature should no longer be asked. It is quite right to raise them, the obsession for a unique answer might not be justified. Instead, science offers us a patchwork of solutions from which one can choose. Chapter 21, \"The Concept of Dignity in the Capability Approach: A Personalist Perspective,\" by Asya Markova, focuses on the medical scientific domains and develops a conceptual account of human dignity including persons with mental disabilities. She does not accept the rationalistic reductionism of the dominant concept of dignity, sharing Martha Nussbaum's critique. The exclusion of persons with mental disabilities is one of the three central problems of justice, generated by rationalistic reductionism. However, Markova cannot agree with Nussbaum, who thinks that it is enough to use our intuitive understanding of what human dignity means. Markova starts with a short analysis of the implicit and explicit uses of the concept of dignity in Nussbaum's version of the capability approach. The author tries to elaborate further on the Introduction 15 concept of dignity using the personalist philosophy, especially Gabriel Marcel's concept of dignity. When analyzing Marcel's concept of dignity, Markova links the distinctive interrelation between love and dignity to the situation of persons with mental disabilities. She points to the importance of resisting the ideological treatment of other people as a \"thing,\" a treatment that stands in contradiction to the ways one has learned to know and value himself by his relations of love with the others. Human dignity, in Markova's discussion, consists in this basic capability to resist to one's own stigmatization and reification by others as well as to the struggle for one's own recognition as a valuable particular person. Chapter 22, \"Understanding Mental Health: Existential Situation and Social Attitude,\" by three researchers, Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian and Manea Teodora, studies mental health. The authors start from the idea that mental health should not be considered only a specific field of medicine, but that it also supposes a cultural understanding. This would be the reason for keeping up the normal human condition in opposition to the abnormal one. Taking into consideration these aspects, the authors' interest leans toward the social attitudes generated by people with mental disorders, attitudes that may differ significantly from stigmatization to acceptance and even excessive praise or respect. The research is based on direct interviews with Romanian mental health professionals. The purpose is to discover how these doctors conceptualize mental health today. The authors consider that philosophy could be very helpful in understanding cultural aspects of mental illnesses. They start from the observation that persons experiencing mental illnesses are confronted with a significant situation: they do not belong to the community any longer, as they no longer share with the others the quality of \"being rational.\" This is in accordance with the Heideggerian meaning of ek-sistance. Next, a definition of what is normality and abnormality in mental condition reveals that being in accordance with the world and being consistent with others would be a classical definition of normality, while an ill person is \"dysthimic and brings a fracture between the object of knowledge and the knowing intellect.\" After interviewing nine mental health professionals, the authors come to some conclusions, especially to the fact that being mentally healthy means not only the lack of symptoms and clinical signs, but also a general well being, which means that the human being should be considered in his totality and implicitly in his being integrated in the community to which he belongs. Chapter 23, \"Changes and Challenges in the Statement on the Quality of Dying,\" by Gabriel Roman, continues the medical research by stressing new contemporary meanings of the quality of dying. The author aims at revealing some meanings of a good death as it was thought by Romanian folkloric tradition and in today's communities. The article focuses on the values of the human person considered under the changes of globalization. 16 Mihaela Pop In old communities, the good death had a psychological and spiritual character, a time and a spatial aspect. Thus, the author finds five main aspects of this concept in the traditional ritual of good death: a social, a psychological, and a spiritual character, combined with a chronological and a spatial aspect. Today, and especially in urban communities, what is significant is the quality of dying in the context of the palliative care system. There are six aspects considered to express basically what people understand by a good enough death. The most important, in the author's opinion is \"the affirmation of the whole person.\" A special interest goes toward the \"death-denying society.\" The author mentions the increasing number of deaths in hospitals and also a more and more widespread interest for the transhumanist movement, or antiaging. The study provides discussions of the extent to which medical and scientific decisions erode traditional religious consolations for the problems involved in dying and bereavement. Part III. Cultural and Spiritual Personalities: Possible Answers to our Contemporary Changes. Each of the articles of this part refers to a significant personality whose theoretical contribution or personal experience of life could help us in the process of a better understanding of our contemporary society and its needs and challenges. We chose a chronological series of cultural portraits. Chapter 24, \"Rousseau's \"Civil Religion\" Reconsidered,\" by John Farina, presents some aspects of Rousseau's understanding and supposes that Jean-Jacques Rousseau's understanding of religion and civil society was more nuanced than was usually acknowledged. Reading again the writings of this French thinker may lay hints for the reformulation of theories of citizenship and religious identity in the twenty-first century. Farina wants to reconsider the role which religion might play in postsecular liberal Western societies. He mentions that Europe has never been post-Christian except for the fact that the church has been removed from a privileged place in the political structure. This is obvious by the manner in which the most liberal thinkers wrote their texts. Rousseau insisted that religion plays a crucial role in the new societies. Unfortunately, his interpreters took only the negative part of what he said about religion and forgot about the positive part. Farina wants to find out \"whether an accommodation of religion is essential for the health of liberal societies in the new Europe and indeed in the global twenty-first century and what Rousseau's insights might contribute to such a new accommodation.\" Rousseau shows a great religious sensibility when speaking of a kind of fundamental religious sentiment basic to human nature, which he calls \"the religion of nature,\" \"true religion,\" or \"the religion of man.\" He never denounces religion. Rather, his work consistently shows a spiritual sensitivity that blends easily with his artistic and moralizing bent. He defends religion against its naturalist critics, the skeptics, and atheists like Introduction 17 Voltaire. He also insists on the role of religion in civil society. Making distinctions among the religions of Man, of Citizen, and of the Priest, Rousseau points to the first one, who, in Farina's opinion, is in fact the Christianity of the Gospels. The religion of Citizen has become the official religion of the State usually named \"civil religion,\" and the religion of the Priest supposes the strict control of its institution, the Church. Neither of these is oriented toward understanding the meanings of the Other. Rousseau's Religion of Man, by contrast, provides a basis for acknowledging in the Other what we experience in ourselves, as Farina states in his article. Chapter 25, \"The Authenticity of the Human Being in Christian Existentialism and Phenomenology: S. Kierkegaard and J. Tischner,\" by Marek Jan Pytko, develops a few fundamental aspects in order to reveal some main characteristics of Authenticity as a human value. The author wonders if it is still worthwhile to be an authentic person in our contemporary society, in the era of mass communication and globalization. In order to answer to his question, Pytko refers to some fundamental concepts of Soren Kierkegaard's philosophy as well as to those expressed by a Polish contemporary thinker, Jozef Tischner. Authenticity is a fundamental challenge of the human existence in Kierkegaard's thought. There are three main elements that help the human being to reach authenticity: decision, repetition, and passion. From the lowest level of his existence (the aesthetic one), through the ethic one, toward the highest level (the Christian way of living), man experiences challenges which make him live more and more authentically. Real authenticity is reached only when man's spirituality is fully open to the constant relationship with eternity, with God-Man. Who is man? What reveals the authenticity, or inauthenticity of his existence? These are some questions that Tischner tries to answer. Under Hegel's influence, Tischner thinks that man has a task for himself: he can be \"for himself,\" per se in order to speak about authentic freedom and to achieve authentic freedom. Summarizing Tischner's ideas, Pytko thinks that the proper expression of freedom is no longer choosing automatically values transmitted by others. Man has the moral duty to make these values \"his own values,\" to become aware of them. This is exactly what is not encouraged by our contemporary mass pop-culture and global sale of ideas, where the lack of authenticity is promoted. In this situation, as Pytko suggests, trying to make efforts to live authentically would be the necessary attitude for each person. Chapter 26, \"The Value of the Human Person: Rabindranath Tagore's Relevance to the Challenges of Today's World,\" by Seema Bose, brings to the reader's attention the contribution of another valuable personality of the twentieth century: Rabindranath Tagore. The author points out his spiritual heritage and the fact that it can be reactivated today. Rabindranath Tagore was a Bengali poet, and the first Asian to receive the Nobel Prize for literature. 'Man' occupies a vital position in Tagore's thinking. Creation through art, poetry, music, dance, and philosophy all stem from what he 18 Mihaela Pop calls \"the surplus in man.\" Mentioning Tagore's thought, Bose thinks that creativity elevates man from a mere physical being to a complete man. In his creative capacity, man is similar to the divine. Another characteristic that Bose stresses is Tagore's love of nature, and the fact that natural beauty cannot be overlooked. According to him, human personality cannot develop if there is a division between the human individual and nature or the world in general. In the human person nature becomes articulated. Love is the root of all relationships and is superior to knowledge. Fulfillment is achieved within interpersonal relationships in spite of pain, suffering, and death. At a time when violence plagues our world and when human beings are so often treated as tools in a world of objects, it is good to be reminded by Tagore that in reality our being is concrete, that is, not to be reduced to any kind of abstraction. Though people belong to different cultures, no one should be exploited at the cost of another. Tagore's great emphasis on the dignity of the human person needs to be remembered in the midst of our tendency to think in terms of globalizing powers. Chapter 27, \"The Acting Person and the Vertical Experience of Transcendence in Karol Wojtyla's Writings,\" by Wilhelm Dancă, intends to undertake a critical consideration of the merits and limitations of the phenomenological analysis of the acting person, based on philosopher Karol Wojtyla's chef-d'oeuvre, The Acting Person. In a short introduction, Dancă articulates Wojtyla's methodology and anthropology, and points out the peculiarity of his philosophical endeavor which starts not from the ontological structure of person, but from human action as such. The deep basic idea consists in the intuition that the person is revealed in and through action. Wojtyla had the conviction that the phenomenology of experience can shed light on the divine roots of man's mystery and the fact that he can find fulfillment only in the transformation resulting from the interpersonal love of communion with God as Person. By adopting this interpretation, Wojtyla saw humans as persons, that is, beings created in the image and likeness of God, intelligent beings endowed with spirituality, freedom, and subjective feelings – an \"imago Dei.\" In his analysis, the author shows that the phenomenology of the experience of human acts requires a perspective capable of taking it beyond simple morphological description. Such perspective becomes manifest at the level of conscience. Dancă examines only the free acts of man, his decisions, and choices, as related to the analysis of the fundamental experience of the I can, but am not constrained to do this and to the presentation of the person as the effective cause of its own actions. Following Wojtyla's example, the author attempts to bring together phenomenology and metaphysics and, to this end, he mentions the experience of the vertical transcendence of person, with a focus on the spiritual nature of person. As a conclusion, the unity of the person's being relies on the spiritual being. The spirit constitutes the person's wealth and that of its acts. Chapter 28, \"Defining Human Dignity: Landmarks in the Thought of Pope Benedict XVI,\" by Şerban Tarciziu, tries to point out his contribution Introduction 19 to the definition of various human values of the twenty-first century. The author begins his article by mentioning some negative aspects of the globalization process, especially in Eastern Europe. In ex-communist countries, many of the social institutions \"meant to serve the common good and the human person seem more inclined to use the human person as an instrument, instead of serving his basic needs in keeping with the human person's God-given dignity.\" Tarciziu remarks that this trend is mostly visible in the process of globalization. The author discusses human dignity from the contemporary philosophical perspective as it results from certain works of T. De Koninck and Gilbert Larochelle, E. Levinas, or George Steiner. Thus he finds that there are many \"areas in which human dignity is being denied or trampled nowadays.\" In order to propose another perspective, a positive one, the author analyzes some important aspects of human dignity as it is defined in the pronouncements of Vatican II, especially in the pastoral Constitution Gaudium et Spes. To prove the idea that these pronouncements are functional in Catholic Church activity, Tarciziu mentions some significant documents, such as the Encyclical Letters of Pope Benedict XVI – Deus caritas est, Spe salvi, and Caritas in veritate, or in messages broadcast on various occasions. Chapter 29, \"Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy – Awakening and Awareness,\" by Magdalena Dumitrana, points out the fact that this Indian Jesuit priest and philosopher (1931-1987) wrote very sensible texts with spiritual and philosophical meanings but which are not completely in accordance with the Christian dogmas. In fact, as it is shown in the Notification of the Catholic Church, attached by Dumitrana, his philosophy combines in an interesting unity Christian ideas with Buddhist and Taoist thoughts. De Mello tries to enable the reader to understand in a deep way his place in the world and to act accordingly. He wants to break the barriers of the spiritual sleep, compelling people to understand, together with their own essence, the source of evil in everybody's life and the way of changing this. He thought that philosophy and religion are useful as they help the human person to become aware of himself. Dumitrana analyzes some of de Mello's fundamental ideas: people are used to living under rules, norms, and regulations, forgetting the sense of freedom; this gives them the illusion of living a protective life which is in fact, in de Mello's thought, a life similar to a dream and to the oneiric utopia. Among other characteristics of the life-sleep, the author mentions egoism as a need to seek well-being and happiness for oneself. Awakening is the fundamental act of simultaneous understanding of the present condition as well as of the atemporal human nature; Awareness would be the leap from the artificial sleepy world to the Reality. Dumitrana also tries to find how de Mello's texts could be classified. She remarks they cannot be assimilated to any present philosophical trend. There could be a possible affiliation with a certain pedagogical ray, still functional. During the seventeenth century, Jan Amos Comenius built a theological doctrine which supported an educational theory and practice that changed the world in the field of 20 Mihaela Pop pedagogy. This spirit was developed by some European pedagogues, and in India, Sri Aurobindo has delineated a type of integral education aiming to facilitate spiritual growth. De Mello was also a mystic, \"a mystic who teaches, not preaches.\" His spiritual philosophy is based on negative truths; in other words, an apophatic philosophical search. Chapter 30, \"The Human Person Between Transcendence and Fault: a Philosophical Perspective,\" by Cătălin Bobb, is centered on Paul Ricoeur's theory on the analysis of fault and transcendence. This theory generates a philosophical anthropology of the negative. In the author's opinion, this could settle the fundamental issues for an axiological theory. In Ricoeur's own words, fault is understood as absolute deficiency of the human being and transcendence as absolute origin of subjectivity. Following Ricoeur, Bobb articulates his arguments against the possibility of a strictly philosophical theory about the fundamental deficiencies of the human being without any help from mythological, theological, or religious contributions. In his Philosophy of Will, Ricouer discusses the impossibility of building a phenomenology of transcendence and fault. The two concepts are denied a phenomenological analysis as they are the absolute marginal points either due to the fact that fault alters man's intelligibility or, respectively, transcendence hides in it the origin of subjectivity. In this way, phenomenology seems to be incapable of discussing the \"things in themselves.\" Ricoeur \"does not exclude from the field of phenomenological analysis transcendence and fault, but excludes, in the end, human subjectivity with its two extremes: origin and alteration,\" says the author. These concepts are the extreme margins that frame the entire philosophy of will. But will remains entrapped in a perpetual road that can not surpass its own limits (within a phenomenological analysis) given by transcendence and fault. To go beyond, to aim beyond intentionality, means to go outside the phenomenology area; to be able to bring into discussion exactly what phenomenology can not talk about. The author elaborates on the following idea: pure will tells us nothing of morality; understanding morality and fundamentally human values originates within human passions; understanding passions and a possible solution regarding them surpasses the possibilities of philosophy. Chapter 31, \"Foucault's Case Against Humanism,\" by Maria Gioga, summarizes some of Foucault's arguments against humanism. She is interested in placing them into the contemporary debate about the human essence. Gioga argues that Foucault's anti-humanism has a pragmatic approach to the human rights problem. He wants human rights to be historically and pragmatically determined. Thus, in Gioga's opinion, Foucault's antihumanism is in fact against the modernist notion of subject and not at all for the core of humanist values. The author distinguishes among three categories of rejections of humansim: 1) conceptual or philosophical (humanism as too entangled in Western subject-focused metaphysics); 2) strategic (the appeal to humanist values as covering up strategies of domination); 3) normative (humanism as being intrinsically Introduction 21 objectionable on the grounds that subjection is per se a form of subjugation). These three possibilities are supposed to correspond to three main stages of Foucault's philosophical development (archaeology, genealogy, and the history of subjectivity). Gioga thinks that Foucault has adopted a pragmatic approach to the human rights problem. Foucault seems to have denied a metaphysical ground for human rights as, in his opinion, there is no human essence; however, rights are good as they help us to fight against the political power of governments. In sum, this study is a proof of the interest that researchers from various countries and cultures pay to the contemporary challenges. At the same time, it illustrates the need for extensive collaboration in order to find the best solutions for the next decades of our century. These articles plead for the need to promote the spiritual and cultural values humankind has already created and consolidated during its long existence. The new challenges do not suppose the annihilation of traditional values; on the contrary, their demand is to assure the best combination between tradition and novelty. We are grateful to the Council for Research in Values and Philosophy (RVP) for announcing our conference on their online platform, thus drawing together the wide international interest essential for this study. Our thanks go to all the authors who sent their articles, making possible this volume. We are grateful to Professors George McLean and John Farina for their generous efforts for the academic quality and the English version of this volume. We are also grateful to the publishers, the University of Bucharest and the RVP, who have made this volume an accomplished fact.\n\nPART I FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN VALUES CHALLENGING CONTEMPORARY GLOBALIZATION\n\nCHAPTER I VALUE DIFFERENTIATION AND THE IDEAL OF MANKIND MARIN AIFTINCĂ Abstract: This paper aims to approach the problem of relationship between personal values and common values, in connection to an ideal of humanity. We start from the thesis that the human being, essentially determined by spirit, identifies itself through a set of values freely appropriated on the grounds of its own cultural tradition, cognition, and aspirations. Personal and common values permanently diversify as a result of the development of knowledge and increasing spreading of information, as well as under the pressure of the changes produced in the historical-social environment. This process is accompanied by a conflict of values that explains the crisis of the contemporary culture. In each of its moments, culture cultivates certain values proper to its specific period or stage. At present, the globalization process promotes and imposes the utilitarian values that feed the conflict between values, which is detrimental to the spiritual nature of the individual and collective person. Finally, I consider that the person, as a human being, is part of humanity, identifying itself through its own values. In this position, it has to be open to those common values that lead humankind, such as: peace, freedom, justice, truth, beauty, good, equality, sacred, etc. Preserving a balance between personal and common values, the universal culture must be lead by the ideal of the person's self-improvement. The education and the norms derived from personal and collective values have to be subordinated to achieving this ideal. Keywords: Differentiation, Person, Personal values, Common values, Culture, Ideal. Among the major phenomena of the contemporary world, one should take into consideration the tension between the increasing of globalization and the highlighting of diversity: two opposite factors that deeply affect the existence of mankind nowadays. To the tendency toward cultural homogeneity and annihilation of cultural particularity, which is specific to the first factor, the second factor opposes differentiation and heterogeneity. Being placed at the crossroads of the two opposite directions, the human person, in both its individual and collective (common) aspects, engenders contradictory effects while trying through action and creation to preserve and assert its identity, to understand itself, and to decipher the meaning of the world. 26 Marin Aiftincă We obviously speak here of a human person as understood from a philosophical viewpoint, namely, in Scheler's terms, as a center of action from whose finite inner existence the spirit emerges;1 or, according to another perspective, as a relational identity of human existence which is distinct due to its singularity and position in the world.2 The facts outlined above bring about at least two critical questions: in which way does the person react3 to the value differentiation, and, on the other hand, what kind of relation is established between personal (individual) and common (collective) values? To answer these questions, our investigation starts from the opinion according to which person, as far as its spirit is an essential determinative factor, lives in an unlimited value universe. Precisely on this presence of spirit the human person grounds its conscience of value, which guides it to freely choose the personal values that it joins and transforms into landmarks of its own life. The idea just stated compels us to remember that the being of value in its ideal state is different from its actual being, namely the reality in which value is embodied. That is to say, at the level of experience, value presents itself as a definite modality of the real, which is not the case for the \"pure value.\" Accordingly, the embodied value shows itself together with its bearer, which could be a person, a utilitarian object, a work of art, etc. Hence the person is only a bearer of values and, as such, it represents only the conditions of value embodiment.4 As a consequence, personal values such as dignity, friendship, love, bravery, humility, faithfulness, prudence, piety, etc., embody themselves in a person without exhausting their content or affecting their universality. Anybody that respected these values could engender or \"realize\" them through attitude or behavior. This is a very significant aspect that, on one hand, certifies the difference and, at the same time, the unity between the transcendental and the empirical being of value, and, on the other hand, validates the extraordinary power of the value to join people together. It is necessary to add that the choice of personal values is not a mere functional exercise. In the first place, it implies the ability to grasp the axiological universe and to perceive the plurality of values. As acts of 1 See: Max Scheler, Die Stellung des Menschen im Kosmos (The Human Place in the Cosmos), translated into Romanian by Vasile Muscă (Bucharest: Paralela 45 Publishing House, 2001), p. 40. 2 L'Enciclopedia della Filosofia e delle Scienze Umane (Encyclopaedia of Philosophy and Human Sciences), translated into Romanian (Bucharest: All Educational Publishing House, 2004), p. 814. 3 We make a distinction between individual and person. By individual we mean human being taken separately, while person stands for human being in relation with others. 4 Nicolai Hartmann, Vechea şi noua ontologie şi alte scrieri, translated into Romanian by Alexandru Boboc (Bucharest: Paideia Publishing House, 1997), p. 104. Value Differentiation and the Ideal of Mankind 27 consciousness, they are inherently limited and cannot combine simultaneously all the values. For this phenomenon, Scheler employed the concept of \"value blindness,\" and N. Hartmann used to refer to it more properly as \"narrowness of the value consciousness.\" Naturally, consciousness does not repel any value that apprehends, yet its capacity of comprising values is also determined, besides the mentioned limitations, by its ability to open itself to them.5 No matter how large the opening of the axiological consciousness might be, the person's choice of and commitment to certain values involve the act of preference that proves the difference between values and their arrangement in a hierarchical system. He/She who prefers a certain value doesn't deny the other subordinated values, and does not exclude the possibility for their being preferred by other consciousnesses, which are not always compatible with his/hers. In such conditions, preference entails, according to Scheler, the intentional aiming at a plurality of values, employing only the individuality of the person, which is determined by its own vocation and place in the world.6 Therefore, the preference facing the plurality and differentiation of values exercises itself according to a series of criteria such as: cultural tradition, the development stage of the feeling of value, the historical change of life conditions, and most important, perhaps, the vocation and aspirations of the axiological subject. As a result, the preference, depending on its refinement, has a decisive influence on the choice of personal values and significantly prompts the will to realize or embody them in cultural goods, thus maintaining movement in the horizon of humanity and giving meaning to life. While stating its own values according to the mentioned criteria, the human person acquires a constant, unitary style of thinking and acting, which is expressed in a peculiar place in the world, providing it with selfidentity in relation to others. That is to say, as Housset put it, the person asserts itself as an \"ontological unity of a subject which moulds itself within the unity of a specific history and biography.\"7 It easily follows from the above considerations that persons distinguish themselves according to the values they freely assume, and, at the same time, according to the way in which they realize those values in their individual and social life. There is no doubt that the value set assumed by the human person (either individual or collective) does not always remain identical with itself. Naturally, values are subjected to an uninterrupted process of differentiation which is produced and maintained by several factors. First of all, it is 5 See: ibid., pp. 109-110. 6 See: Louis Lavelle, Traité des valeurs, Tome Premier, Théorie générale de la valeur (Paris : Presses Universitaires de France, 1951), p. 601. 7 Emmanuel Housset, Personne et sujet selon Husserl (Paris : P.U.F., 1997), p. 84. 28 Marin Aiftincă necessary to mention that values themselves have a differential nature.8 Although they enjoy common features as autonomy and irreducibility, values distinguish themselves by specific traits that allow their grouping in distinct classes (economical, political, moral, theoretical, aesthetic, etc. But even inside one and the same class there are precise differences between values. Within the class of aesthetic values for instance, beauty – which is marked by harmony, proportion, and measure – is clearly distinguished as tragic, sublime, or comic. As it is known, values are closely related to the real world. This fact explains another extremely important aspect that determines the differentiation of values, at least from the point of view of the approach being discussed. Depending on the real object to which they apply and on the soul's aspirations fulfilled by their embodiment, values present themselves to us in specific modalities of the real. Further, Vianu conceived a theory concerning the volume of value9 which asserts that values, including the personal ones, are being gradually differentiated by the acts of desire that comprise them: permanent or intermittent, more or less intense.10 The volume variations of values are also to be tracked within the individual consciousnesses,\"11 or the consciousness of certain historical ages. There are persons to whom certain values might be more or less important depending on the associated desiderative acts, which might occur often or less frequently. This is also the case with the cultural consciousness of an era. As a result, the consciousness acts mentioned before, such as desire and preference, are closely related to the flexibility of life relations. Therefore, personal and common values depend on the action of determinative factors, such as: education, the extent and depth of the knowledge, tradition, the rapid diffusion of information, socio-historical changes, participation in the creation of culture, etc. These factors bring about an unceasing diversification and differentiation of values. The spirit itself is in search of increasingly new values as \"the values themselves exist independently of it.\"12 The differentiation of value phenomenon that came through ages from the depths of the history of culture brings about contradictory consequences. The philosophical critique points out the advantages and, at the same time, the difficulties of this phenomenon that had been grounded on the Kant's principle of irreductibility of values. According to this 8 Cf. Tudor Vianu, Filosofia culturii (Philosophy of Culture), in \"Opere\" (Works), vol. 8 (Bucharest: Minerva Publishing House, 1979), pp. 164–165. 9 The volume of value lies in \"the psychological relation between the empiric constitution of desiderative consciousness and its object.\" Tudor Vianu, Introducere în teoria valorilor (Introduction to the Theory of Values), in \"Opere\" (Works), vol. 8 (Bucharest: Minerva Publishing House, 1979), p. 83. 10 See: Tudor Vianu, op. cit., p. 83. 11 Ibid., p. 84. 12 Nicolai Hartmann, op. cit., p. 110. Value Differentiation and the Ideal of Mankind 29 principle, value has no other genus proximum than the totality of values, as the end of any value is an intrinsic one. Hence, the autonomy of value, since it cannot be subordinated in order to define another value(s).13 From the viewpoint of the afore-mentioned thesis, Vianu's analysis stressed that the modern differentiation of values was a necessary condition for cultural progress and personal freedom, and, at the same time, for social tolerance. But he also considered that the mentioned phenomenon gave rise to a series of inconveniences that led to the \"disorganization of society\" and instilled into the modern man \"the depressing feeling of not having a central life theme.\" The modern differentiation of values made man unable to encompass life entirely, thus contributing to its breakup. The damaging consequences of the differentiation of values affect the destiny of modern man and of the entire society. Such arguments are frequently invoked, and not without reason, to support the thesis according to which the differentiation of values is the essential source of the conflict of values and thus of the crisis of modern culture. It is required to specify here that by crisis of culture we don't necessarily mean destruction, but rather creation and particularly rearrangement of values according to different criteria.14 We will not dwell here on the advantages and disadvantages of the modern differentiation of values, although they are worthy of attention, but rather on the conflict of values, whose disturbing effects are more visible nowadays. Of course, this is not a conflict between values themselves, although, being autonomous, they are involved in a true competition for their realization. This conflict affects in the first place the bearers of the values, whose process of evaluation sustains the embodiment of certain values and rejects the others. Only in this sense are we allowed to talk about values as being in conflict with one another. For example, a person, either individual or collective, can embrace a certain value, such as a religious one, and organize his life in terms of the adopted value, being indifferent to, or even intolerant of, all the others. This attitude might result in religious fanaticism, a behavior that devastates our historical era as well as others. Similar examples of axiological exclusiveness might be also encountered by those people who live according to the viewpoint of a single value, which can be the one related to their profession, or other values such as the economic, political, or aesthetic ones. Such an attitude proves to be a distortion of the axiological consciousness and has a negative impact on other people and on the entire culture. In referring to this issue, Jiang Chang notes that different communities evolved throughout history under a variety of value systems, which configured the different cultural patterns, some of them being unchanged 13 See: Tudor Vianu, op. cit., pp. 162–164. 14 See: Marin Aiftincă, Filosofia culturii (Philosophy of Culture) (Bucharest: The Romanian Academy Publishing House, 2008), p. 10. 30 Marin Aiftincă even in the present day.15 This is beyond doubt the source of the existing conflict between Eastern and Western values, a conflict that was amplified rather than diminished by ever-increasing intercultural communication. To the same effect, the cited author asserted that \"This is the chief feature of value conflicts in the present world. This kind of value conflict is much different from those that occurred before the twentieth century, especially before modern time.\"16 Therefore, it is undeniable that today, one of the consequences of value differentiation and conflict, at both individual and collective levels of the person, consists in the fact that humanity is marked not by isolation, but rather by a tendency of fusing and merging values, at least with respect to the fundamental ones. Instead of the personal values that belong to the local or national cultural tradition, there are gradually embraced under the pressure of globalization ideas and values such as: liberty, equality, democracy, justice, market economy, environmental protection, etc. These values acquired universal validity and became, in Jiang Chang's terms, goals of the entire world.17 The modern differentiation of values, accompanied by the conflict it engenders, is related, inter alia, to the phenomenon of globalization that is, as it is well known, one of the most serious challenges of the contemporary world. Judging by its consequences, globalization does not confine itself to universalizing some personal values and exterminating others. On the contrary, the critics of globalization accuse it of having dangerous effects on both individual and community. Being a source of different discontents and conflicts, globalization is experienced in everyday life as uncertainty and anxiety, making people vulnerable to various tyrannies and cults. It also implies migration of capital and job loss, the distress of local wars and religious collisions, the split of societies in groups involved in weird ruinous struggles. All of these have a negative influence on the structure of individual and collective values, giving way to the temptation of embracing non-values. Supported by several defining factors as information, trade, finances, industry, and technology, globalization is the agent of a single civilization, that is, of a so-called \"global culture\" that is detached from any cultural tradition.18 The products of this culture, which are composed by goods and symbols made in one or two centers of technological and financial power that are stimulated by an expanding market, are destined to be fully consumed. At the same time, they make up a stunningly less dogmatic but more persuasive ideology that modifies the axiological scale by overthrowing spiritual values and instead placing utilitarian values on 15 Jiang Chang, Value Conflict and Identifying in the Background of Globalization. Paper presented at the 21st Philosophy World Congress (Istanbul, August 2003). 16 Ibid., p. 1. 17 Ibid., p. 2. 18 For further reading on this matter, see: Marin Aiftincă, op. cit., pp. 127– 149. Value Differentiation and the Ideal of Mankind 31 the highest level. Owing to their easy, hedonist, shallow nature, the latter possess an unusual force of persuasion by which they take hold of those minds that are turned especially to the outer world. Utilitarian values always lead us toward an easier, enticing, but perverse way, as it lures human beings into a cheap life, while spiritual values that guide the person toward self-knowledge and self-improvement call for serious efforts, abnegation, and sacrifice. Thus it is easy to understand why utilitarian values are so seductive. This lack of balance inside a person's pattern of values conceals the inner emptiness of man as both individual and member of a community, fascinated by outer world, by the shallow multicolored variety of a reality which is beyond his own self. The destruction of the relationship between spiritual and utilitarian values, ensuring the prevalence of the latter, explains the present crisis of culture that announces another kind of barbarism, whose signs are visible today in the entire realm of culture, especially in what constitutes moral behavior. In the context of current approaches to the destiny of humanity, the critical reflection, concerned with the changes that are assaulting human societies – a rapid pace of change that defies perception and adaptation – emphasized an opposing tendency to globalization that leads to an atomization of society by dividing mankind in groups and regions. The fragmentation of community goes to the confused individual in search of identity and meaning. No matter how much we appreciate the widespread global technological revolution we are witnessing, we must not neglect the accompanying cultural revolution. Under the lasting influence of postmodern nihilism, the latter draws attention to the deconstruction of institutions and mentalities, and to the denying and overthrowing of the old cultural patterns and values, accused of falsity and hypocrisy. In an obstinate search for authenticity that transgresses the classic pattern, truth, universality, tradition, value, objective reality, and any other general concepts that played a part in the evolution of culture and human society are prosecuted and condemned. The blamed concepts were replaced by a series of notions as relativism, diversity, particularism, emotionalism, and multiculturalism. They support an emotionalist and extremist individualism that became an easy-to-manipulate constituent of a homogenizing global world, ruled by consumption. Leaving out the undeniable advantages brought by knowledge, communication, and the convergence of some general interests at the global level, contemporary civilization seriously affects the human being by its offensive position against the classical life models, now being replaced by behaviors and values grounded on extreme liberalism, consumptionism, and striving after the sensational. The unadjusted human person is thus placed in an unstable, fragmented realm governed by extreme individualism. Therefore, the bearers of the new values are unable to encompass life in its entirety. This is also one of the consequences of value differentiation that places a person's values, either individual or common, in a dramatic 32 Marin Aiftincă conflict with those promoted by actual changes, mostly sustained by money and economic profit. Even though the mentioned phenomena and facts nourish the conflict of values and, therefore, the crisis of contemporary culture, they do not represent a sufficient reason to lay the entire blame on the differentiation of values, which is a process that accompanies the evolution of life. On the contrary, some philosophers have strong arguments to assert that \"the differentiation of values is a modern achievement which cannot be unmade as far as it is the essential condition for that 'promethean' theme undertaken by modern man, which consists in an as-extensive-as-possible conquering of nature and spirit.\"19 It is thus an important ingredient for the functioning of personal and common values. The teleological structure of soul is not one-sided; it is hierarchized and, at the same time, able to perceive and understand all other values. Therefore, we have the ability to organize our lives in accordance with a super-ordinate value without expelling all others; they can be subordinated to the principle value that guides the personal life, and can be grouped around it. Taking this chance, which is available to anyone, means to live in accordance with a single value and to be, at the same time, open-minded to the universe of all values, thus encompassing world in its entirety. Such a possibility is generally confirmed by the particular experience and, at the same time, by the entire experience of historical cultures.20 As a human being, the person, which is identifiable by its own values, is part of the community at all its structural levels (i.e., family, nation, or world community), and, at the same time, of humankind in its entirety. As such, the person is united and can interact with all those who believe in the same values and organize their lives according to them. At the same time, a person can and must be open to the common values that guide the structures of community and the entire humankind. Such values as peace, liberty, welfare, justice, right, equality, dignity, beauty, truth, sacredness, etc., make up the sphere of personal values. Preserving our individuality as a creative source and potential, we have to rationally correlate individual and common values so as to respect the values of community that ensure the dignified coexistence of all human beings and of cultures on the whole. Therefore, the answer is not to emphasize as absolute our personal values against the values of the community or vice versa, but to create a natural balance between them, preserving, at the same time, our plenary attachment to that one value which we raised to the rank of a life ideal. There is no perfect human being, but we can find instead an idea of moral self-improvement; Husserl expressed it in the following terms: \"I wish from now on to live my whole 19 Cf. Ibid., pp. 172–179. 20 Ibid. Value Differentiation and the Ideal of Mankind 33 life, with all its acts and contents, as the best of the possible lives.\"21 We are dealing here with a husserlian categorical imperative that synthesises an infinite ideal of morality, and this is precisely why it appears to us as being limitative. We think there is a more complex and adequate ideal: the one that consists in the self-improvement of the human being, as it employs thinking, creation, and action under a moral form. To this infinite ideal should be subordinated the personal and common values, and all cultural forces should be dedicated to it. The education and the norms derived from personal and common values have to be correlated to achieving this ideal which remains an eternal calling toward the absolute over time and cultures. Romanian Academy Bucharest, Romania aiftinca@acad.ro 21 E. Husserl, Einleitung in die Ethik. Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1920 und 1924, Husserliana XXXVII, hrsg. Von Henning Puecker (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004).\n\nCHAPTER II THE VALUES OF THE NEW CIVILIZATION BOGDANA TODOROVA Abstract: The new period of challenges to democracy demands new intellectual efforts to find the way of the future. The philosopher's role is to analyze and criticize worldview systems in order to achieve a future value synthesis. Contemporary cultural resources (philosophy, religion and myth, moral and everyday consciousness) rooted in different social experience should be critically analyzed in terms of transition from the so-called technogenetic civilization to a new desirable social and intellectual order. Is the synthesis of values belonging to different cultures, social groups, and types of intellectual praxis possible at all? How do science and religion interact in these terms? Keywords: values, identity, dialogue, religion. The axiological discourse in science and religion is associated with the real historical experience of the relation of religion to church to society. This experience is in turn the subject of endless discussions between the representatives of various axiological systems – conservative, liberal and radical, secular and religious. A dialogue is required to minimize the possible proneness to conflict of this state. Science is centered in relation to examining the objective-substantive structure of the world, while religion puts an accent on the subject-subjective relation, the human effort to communicate, which regulates the fundamental values of culture. The relationship of science to religion varied through the historical course of civilization. Religion and myth have a dominating role in the culture of traditional societies. Tradition takes a central place among axiological priorities. In traditional cultures, religion and myth are what form the human worldview, and they set a unique mental framework, to which scientific research must correspond. The situation radically changed with the formation of the new type of civilizational development related to the Reformation and the Enlightenment in the European region. It is often defined by the extremely unclear concept of the West opposed to the traditional East. Today, this type of development comprises the whole world. We can define it as the technological civilization that develops when inventions, innovations, and the introduction of new technologies lead to accelerated changes of social life. Here, science gradually turns into one of the dominating values of civilization. However, this cult of scientific rationality also has its own historical roots. In antiquity, the rational understanding of world was considered a condition for legitimate human behavior. Not only the ancient tradition, but also the Christian worldview played an enormous role in this rational 36 Bogdana Todorova concept. Representing the imitation of Divine reason, human reason was seen as able to reach the Divine plan realized on Earth. There are two approaches for the religious understanding of Nature in the Christian tradition, with the better knowledge of God as the ultimate purpose (a natural theology). The approach characteristic to the early Church and which is preserved in Greek-Byzantine theology saw Nature as the symbolic system by which God speaks to men. The approach that was established in the Latin West from the early eighteenth century developed the aspiration to read the Book of Nature written by God in order to understand how its creation is formed and acts, and to reveal the logic of this process and its inner law. Similar concepts lead to the occurrence of a new type of rationality that developed further in modern European science. The Christian cultural tradition was a prerequisite to the new concept of Nature. It presented the bonding link between the ancient and modern European cultures. Medieval Christianity preserved the characteristics for the ancient cultural opposition between natural and factitious, but it included also the possibility for a transition to different, new levels of understanding, since Man was viewed as God's creature, created through His image and likeness. The interpretation of experimental activity as the main method to examine Nature is the key factor for the formation of the new type of rationality. No such interpretation is present in ancient culture, since Nature is viewed as a living body, with any single part having its own feature and being subordinated to the harmony of the whole. The idea of experimenting with any single part is viewed as the violation of wholeness. The artificial (techne) is opposed to the natural (physis). Understanding the Cosmos is possible only notionally, so ancient science is ultimately philosophy and mathematics. In a technological type of culture, Nature is seen as a specific field of human manifestations. The ancient concept of physis and Cosmos here opposes Nature, being the symbiosis of qualitatively different entities, which, however, possess the aspect of homogeneity, following common laws that are universal for the various classes of individual objects. The values of the artificial and the natural are aligned in the New Age and the rational change in the nature of human activity does not contradict it, but is rather adjusted to its natural constitution. This new attitude toward Nature is visualized in the concept of Nature that serves as the prerequisite of the development of a fundamentally new notion of the understanding of the world. In the history of modern European culture, science comes into a serious contradiction to religion, starting to form its own opinion about the world and pretending that has its own worldview. There is no need to adapt some scientific picture of the world to the religious notions of a culture in order to include it in this culture. Moreover, the Christian tradition has an aspiration to coordinate the principles of the Christian concept of the world with scientific advances. Western culture, at the stage of a technological type of civilization, preserves Christian tradition in a reformed The Values of the New Civilization 37 configuration, combining it to the scientific values. Along with that, however, this new civilizational type also provoked global crises endangering human existence itself. We have good reason to doubt the ability of modern civilization to find the solution to the crisis without changing the strategy for development and the basal values of technological culture. Thereafter, we can speak about a new civilizational type, a third one, comparing the traditionalistic and technological. Some researchers define it as a post-neoclassical type of rationality related to complex developing systems possessing synergetic features. Biological and social systems, nanotechnologies, and computer sets belong to this type of systems. If we must change the basal values of modern civilization, how this will affect the relationship of science and religion? The new trends in this relationship can be viewed as the growth of new values; for example, the construction of new situations for the dialogue between science and religion. It is not only national rationality that can be interpreted as the growth of new values occurs in the frameworks of the modern type of technological culture. Changes also take place in religion itself, and they can be assessed from the position of searching for new values. IDENTITY AND DIALOGUE IN THE CONTEXT OF AN AXIOLOGICAL DISCOURSE The concept of value is the central category of philosophical axiology. For believers and theologians, religious and corresponding theological values do not represent the features of culture but they are objectively present and are defined by the features of being; or at least this is the interpretation of Christianity. For theologians, God is the basis of reality as a benefit, being the completeness of perfection. This is not a value, but the power that created the world and allowed us to live, and that gives us the chance of immortality and salvation. Christ is the personification of the soul-winning origin, the incarnation of eternal life; He is real, more real than anything real. He is the root of the empirical world and the Way to Paradise. In this regard, He is the mouthpiece of the other hypostases, the divine-existing features of reality as Truth, Good, Beauty, and Justice. The entire religious reality is penetrated by values that exist in various religions. One of the reasons for the increase of religiosity in the modern world is the need for stable conceptual beliefs and opinions, in which science can participate, even in the best case, only indirectly. Unlike science, religion, with its tradition, is oriented to conceptually important questions and has the power of an authority and a historical being. The world of Christian culture, with its spiritual wealth, assimilated into itself metaphysical, ethical, artistic, and socio-economic thought that masks pure religious perspectives. 38 Bogdana Todorova The main problem is this: is the general course of civilizational changes able to influence the axiological systems of autonomous cultures, involving them in the process of an inevitable inner change and testifying, in this manner, to its own cultural, but not transcendental, nature? While positive answers in relation to a cultural system such as science is generally acknowledged, things differ in relation to religion. The existence of the Christian myth in itself is categorically withdrawn from the power resource of the time and culture. It is not acknowledged as the exclusive fruit of the activity of the human beings and human creativity. The truth can be dependent on time and culture of those who believe, but not against its own existence and dogmas. This difference is not devoid of doubts, but even so, it has to be taken into account. When European integration is at issue, one must not forget that any nation has different features proceeding from its national character, history, and culture. Modern global society needs more than ever to make adequate decisions on the problems such as ecology, demography, and terrorism. Two scenarios can be developed regarding the needed decisions. The first relies on the dominating values or priorities of modernity: technological progress versus ecology, scientific rationality versus tradition, maximization of production and consumption at the expense of resources, a formal legality in relation to the person – the scenario that will lead to the aggravation of the crisis and later to cataclysm. The second scenario reckons on the radical change in axiological priorities. This requires the analysis of the two types of an axiological discourse, in science, on one hand, and in theology on the other. The 'logic' in the development of culture has to be also taken into account. Models for the development of knowledge that are borrowed from philosophy are established as its objective regularities – accumulation, proliferation, and the change of a paradigm. The cumulative principle of replenishment proceeds from the past – an abstract philosophical norm, in which the accent is put on identity and the leading role of a dialogue. In the same way as the accumulated theoretical generalizations and facts in science, this model of a cultural development itself is the collection of advances based on the abstract philosophical norms of excellence. Being considered in this manner, culture keeps a human identity but alienates the person from the other persons in the cultural dialogue. This form of a cultural choice is determined by the rational logic supposing the regularities, which are characteristic of social sciences. The model of the change of a paradigm is the revolutionary phenomenology that proceeds from the present. The emphasis here is put on the change of identity and the change of the positions in a dialogue. It focuses on the concrete sociological norm of human behavior that supposes both the partial and complete replacement. That is to say that culture is viewed as a field for free choice where any norm is completely incommensurable with the other. The same applies also to human identity The Values of the New Civilization 39 and cultural dialogue. According to this model, the history of culture is the complex of various cultural types that are not liable to a mutual comparison; the choice between them is controlled emotionally and not logically. A third type – proliferation – is based on the principle of the relativistic democratism that relies on the future (the emphasis here is on the loss of identity and the arbitrary positions in a dialogue). The formulated purpose is practically inaccessible and often has nothing in common with real human behaviors. For this reason, the future is unpredictable but, simultaneously, only it allows a choice between different cultural systems to be made. According to this model, there is no sense in speaking about a definite identity and the self-sufficient position in a dialogue. The motto in this model is: \"a purpose is nothing, movement is everything.\" All the three cultural scenarios can be traced in history and the logic of a culture is largely a projecting intentional strategy for the invasion in cultural creation and its theoretical understanding. RATIONALITY AS THE REGULATIVE VALUE OF CULTURE Our attitude toward culture as a comprehended reality presupposes rationality as a cultural value. The main problem is to combine our values with the values of others. Are different cultures incompatible in general? To what extent is a cultural synthesis possible by means of rational ways? Which forecasts and analyses are possible in this sphere? Can we measure the success of our cultural projects practically? Jurgen Habermas speaks about such a project – the project for a communicative rationality, in which people participating in social discussions are engaged. His project assumes that people accept the rules of a rational discourse, which is in contradiction to the current situation of the radicalization of controversies. The opposition between the Western Christian, or the so-called rational, culture and the Eastern Islamic, or traditional, culture is strongly expressed. The majority of people, independent of their cultural affiliation, suffer at the time of an economic crisis, a war, or terroristic outrages but no one could preliminarily find the rational solution of such situations until now. The solutions are measured as rational post factum and they are taken by the victor. In fact, a cultural sense plays an important and real role only in two areas: our own cultural area and that of the other, which differs from ours. We exist in the first, but the second is only an emotional and conceptual construction for us. The culture to which we belong determines our knowledge. According to Schutz, we can examine objectively and scientifically only a foreign culture. If we aim at a rational and conscious effort searching a cultural synthesis, we have to leave the limits of local cultures and act neutrally regarding standards, values, and ideals. This is absolutely impossible due to the adherence to the ideal of a scientific objectiveness, which is adopted by 40 Bogdana Todorova the paradigm of classical science. We are all foreigners today and we live everywhere, due to global communications. Trying to understand various cultural determinants creating conditions for the rational discourse of culture, we can classify three levels: The level of direct life impressions – examining the native language, long-term relations in family, relatives, school, birth-place. At this level, we have the practical, unconscious emotional acquisition of a culture. The level of the acquisition of knowledge – an experience, contact with a foreign culture (travels, learning foreign languages, communication with foreigners). This level problematizes common sense and gives the possibility of increasing the sphere of cultural knowledge; the individual can form his own picture of a foreign culture, even a total misunderstanding or fear. Due to the separation of an indirect cultural basis, cognition appears correct at this level. The level of the philosophical and scientific research of the culture. Here, various cultures are examined as the equal parts of the third world, in the spirit of Popper. This sphere of an objective knowledge demonstrates the pluralism of cultural universals. Right here is the place of the rational dialogue of cultures. THE MAIN DILEMMA: ANTHROPOLOGISM VERSUS ECOLOGISM A dialogue does not occur in an intercultural space but within the frameworks of a definite culture, based on the resources characteristic of that culture. One of the modern myths that proceeds from sociobiology, along with the common disappointment of Western intellectuals and the boom of Eastern religious schools, is global ecologism – a good example of how new cultural universals emerge. The Anglo-American sociologist of science, Fuller, calls it a 'karmic Darwinism.' Its consequences are as follows: the elimination of a subject and the refusal of the anthropomorphic bases of culture; the refusal of science and technological progress; the refusal of rationality as the foundation of knowledge, communication, and social regulation. Fuller suggests that in the twenty-first century Western science will ally itself with the Biblical religions, which will lead to an 'anthropic perspective' as opposed to the karmic determinism. The anthropic perspective is associated with Christianity, Judaism, and Islam, and is secularized as positivism in the nineteenth century, identifying social sciences as humanistic religions. The second combines Buddhism, Jainism, and Hinduism, along with Western Epicureism. The neo-Darwinist synthesis in the twentieth century becomes its secular variant establishing a normative framework for the world. In their works, Dockins, Wilson, and Singer defend the idea for the refusal of normative privileges for man using naturalistic arguments. This idea received the enviable support of postmodernism. Fuller proposes that monotheists should combine themselves The Values of the New Civilization 41 with positivists to rehabilitate the collective humanistic project. The understanding of the participation in science as a civil obligation or even in the sense of Boyle, Newton, and Cont as a religious service has a decisive significance for this project. According to Fuller, the twenty-first century will witness the collision between the anthropic and karmic perspectives, and the main questions that will be asked are as follows: Is Man the image and likeness of God, and does he has the right of a privileged position in Nature because of this? The Western monotheistic religions come to an agreement on this point, while the pantheistic and polytheistic religions of the East do not. In metaphysical concepts, this sounds like the opposition between universum (the unity of hierarchies and regularities) and polyuniversum (the chaotic interaction of powers and substances). The key concepts of the karmic ideology are as follows: the equality of humans and animals, a moral-political and religious tolerance, the predominance of the elemental forces of social development, the negation of categories such as 'progress' and 'decay,' the predetermination of a natural (biological or cosmological) determinant over the cultural determinant, holism instead of individualism. Yet in the past (1960), similar ideas for a karmic ideology were criticized. Jorge Luis Borges and Roland Barthes with their theses about the 'death of the author' are the first, and later, their thesis is continued by the thesis of the death of the subject, in which Nietzsche's 'God's death' is introduced. Any minimization of the role of Man in Nature at the background of modern global cataclysms would be fatal. However, one positive thing in the idea of Fuller is the term 'anthropia.' In its essence, it is a new type of humanism. Ginsburg develops the idea for a secular humanism as the alternative to religion. This new humanism combines in itself the values of religion and philosophy. It is destined to define the new position of Man in the rational world. The old classicism is closely related to anthropocentrism, culture-centrism (the central place of the culture in relation to economics and politics), and interdisciplinarism (involvement with science as the source of a critical philosophical reflection). A dialogue between science and Christian theology is possible in it, as there is a place in it also for modernization. From a theological point of view, Man is similar to God and this places him at a forward position above all. The aspiration for an interdisciplinary synthesis is strongly expressed in the modern 'natural theology.' Religion as a cultural form separates from policy and economics, turning to the development of a person in its axiological dimensions. Religion has to be the ally of science, but not viceversa. Hence, the place of a philosopher in the dialogue for values is significant. THE PHILOSOPHER – CENTRIST OR MARGINAL? The critical position of the humanist is at the crossroads of cultures. The position of the philosopher, at the intersecting point of cultural epochs. 42 Bogdana Todorova The discussed anthropic perspective is a reference to the epoch of the Renaissance, when Man is given the status of a hero. The person is in a competition with God, creating societies and cultures, dominating Nature technologically, and showing the abilities of demiurge. If we look closer at current political and religious extremism and fanaticism, we will recognize new trends toward heroism. These are the new political leaders, antiglobalists, terroristic leaders who consider themselves new 'crusaders,' struggling against world evil. This heroism is a bad advisor regarding a dialogue for values, because compromise and synthesis as the goals of a rational discussion are alien to it. Such heroism cannot be the form of an axiological discourse. Only a philosophical analysis is able to show the false nature of an axiological polarization. If we return to the delineated three levels of cultural dynamics, we see that the opposition between the karmic and anthropic principles is possible only at the first two levels. Their limitation and syncretism can be seen at the third level of cultural dynamics, where the analysis is based on rationality. Therefore, the mass conscience constructs social values without being interested in their critical analysis. The ideological strategy is to justify your own values and to criticize the values of the other. Only the philosopher is able to exit from the frameworks of any axiological system trying to preserve political and axiological neutrality. Certainly, being at the first and second levels of cultural dynamics, representing an empirical subject, the philosopher can prefer and form a definite axiological significance, using the cumulative method and the method of a paradigmatic jump. However, according to his underlying essence, in Wittgenstein's vision, action, and not just knowledge, is important for him  he knows that he does not know anything. The only position that he can take directly in a dialogue is to create the ways of achieving the dialogue leading to consensus. His neutrality is a guarantee of distance. The philosopher is able to build critical analytic values in the broader context of an intellectual culture. This distance allows him to see a horizon and to act in compliance with the principle of complementarity. Aligning the anthropic project with a philosophical discourse suggests a diversion from scientific to theological positions and vice versa as an effort to reach common axiological foundations. Institute for the Study of Societies and Knowledge Bulgarian Academy of Sciences Sofia, Bulgaria bony69bg@yahoo.com CHAPTER III MAN IN CONTEMPORARY CULTURE LEON DYCZEWSKI Abstract: Modern (popular) culture creates a technical-economicmanagerial man. He is professionally well-educated, operative, and exploits the development of natural sciences, information, and technique. He is a perfect consumer too. But he needs the spiritual sphere, higher (nonmaterial) values, moral revival, the link between freedom and responsibility, and renunciation of uncritical consumerism. This new attitude is initiated by social groups and can be called \"intelligence of life.\" It warns against the instrumentalization of the human person, and is seeking a more profound sense of life. Keywords: culture, society, social groups, creativity. I. It is generally accepted that the development of any society depends on creative individuals. Hence, the more such individuals there are, the more they are open to new problems, and the more quickly these individuals enter new fields of life, the better. Their quantity and quality are a peculiar characteristic of modern society in relation to so-called mass society, and even more so to the old, traditional one. Passing from the mass society to the modern one is first of all marked by an increasing pluralism and differentiation in all fields of life, and in fast absorption of modern technologies to production, services, and everyday life. Hence, more and more professions appear, and mass production and standardized services are replaced by a variety of forms and qualities. Mass culture is driven out by a popular culture that abolishes the division into high and low culture, forming a great mosaic of cultural groups. Everyone may choose a culture that suits his tastes and his level. Individualized consumption competes perfectly well with mass consumption. Education that up to now has been to a large degree standardized becomes ever more specialized, and its levels are more varied. Creative work becomes more democratic and ever more frequently forming one's identity as self-reliant. These processes are caused by creative individuals, and many researchers notice an increase in their number in modern societies. Richard Florida, – like Peter Drucker, Dean Simonton, and in Poland Edward Nęcka, Józef Kozielecki, – advances the thesis that in the modern society a new social class (in Polish the term \"layer\" sounds better) is slowly formed; that is, the creative class (layer), and in the future it is this class that will shape the image of society. Florida includes in it \"scientists, engineers, architects, designers, writers, artists, musicians, or those who use their creative work as the most important factor in their jobs: in business, education, health service, law, or other ones\" (Florida: IX). Florida justifies his thesis on the example of American 44 Leon Dyczewski society, in which the expenditure on research and development is increasing (from five million dollars in 1953 to two hundred and fifty million in 2000), the number of scientists and engineers is increasing (in 1950 their number was 400 in every 100 thousand inhabitants, and in 1999 it grew to 1800), the number of people who make a living of cultural and artistic work is growing (in 1950 there were 350 such individuals in every 1 million inhabitants, and in 1999 the number grew to 900), the number of patents is growing (in the years from 1954 to 1999, it was tripled), and so is the percentage of those who in their professional jobs ever more clearly look for satisfaction and take it on for other reasons than the pay; this also concerns those who often change their job (Florida: 100-105). Formation of the creative class has been assuming the character of a conscious action, which is manifested by the meeting of 100 delegates from the USA, Canada, and Puerto Rico in 2003 in Memphis, Tennessee. At the end of the debate about the creative class in the modern society, the socalled Memphis Manifesto was created. In the Introduction its authors state that \"Creativity has a fundamental significance for individuals and groups of people, and is an inalienable trait of every person\" (Kozielecki (1): 18). Here are a few practical rules; to keep to them is to favor the development of the creative class: argue that every human being, especially every child, has the right to be creative; build a creative ecosystem – it may include artists, innovators, and designers; remove barriers that hinder creativity, like mediocrity, intolerance, social chaos, poverty, bad schools, and degradation of the environment (Kozielecki (1): 18). Researchers give different estimates of the sizes of the creative class in particular societies. Bogdan Cichomski assesses that in Poland now it may amount to 11-13 percent, which is about 20 percentage points less than in developed countries (Kozielecki (1): 18). Now the questions appear: what features does today's creative class have, what makes it stand out from other classes? Is it homogeneous or diverse, and to what degree? What are and what may be the further results of its activities? General statements saying that it is the opposite of passivity, the reverse of consumerism, unification, materialistic attitude, rat race, and comfort are not sufficient. II. Modern society has chosen knowledge, technology, informatics, and economy as the solution. Knowledge that has been continuously broadened allows man to learn ever more about the objective world and to understand it better. Technology, continuously perfected, gives man power over the world. Knowing the world ever better and having ever better tools, man may more and more effectively intervene in nature and adjust it to his Man in Contemporary Culture 45 needs. Economy and informatics, as particularly important branches of modern knowledge, help to quickly achieve the aims man has set, and to do it with smaller and smaller financial outlays. Man, fascinated by the perpetual advancing of new achievements in the surrounding world, has forgotten about himself to a certain degree. Although he knows more about himself than even a dozen years ago, it seems to him that he understands himself ever less, that he feels more and more lost. In the past, when man's contribution to the appearance of the world was only slight, he occupied a definite place in it and felt surer of himself. Today, when he is able to change nearly everything in the world and to arrange it in his own way, it would seem that he should feel a lot better in it, since he knows it very well. However, he gets lost in it; often he cannot find the proper way. Modern society, having taken the way of arranging the outer world and of accumulating possessions, not intending to decrease its dynamics of development while heading in this direction, favors individuals who are able to think in a business-like and systematic manner, who easily recognize and analyze the processes occurring in the objective world, who know how its particular elements and forces work, and who can compare and combine them in order to obtain new qualities. Modern society favors individuals with organizational talents who achieve their aims with the smallest possible outlays, who can recognize human needs and satisfy the needs with new products. Individuals searching for new technologies and working out models of development are especially privileged, as are the managers who implement their achievements. It is for their work that modern society allocates great sums of money, and it is they who are relatively well rewarded. In recent years those individuals who can collect, process and propagate information have clearly been gaining importance. They have such importance in the democratic societies guaranteeing freedom of speech and free transfer of information that they make mediocre politicians popular ones, and those politicians who are talented or valuable for the society, but inconvenient for them, they doom to \"non-existence\" in social awareness; they make a disease that is not very dangerous a pandemic (an example here may be bird flu – 2010); they threaten politicians that nobody can win if he opposes writers, radio journalists, film-makers, people writing on the Internet or working in public relations. In fact, this is what journalists said at the end of February 2006 to Jarosław Kaczyński, who proclaimed effecting changes in the world of the Polish media, and they have achieved their aim. In modern society, the individuals that have been described above form the creative class, which, because of the features that are peculiar to it, may be called technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia. In the past, in Polish or Russian society, the intelligentsia as a specific social category was formed by individuals who best interpreted the values that were significant for the whole of individual and social life, who defended those values, and who propagated and consolidated them. At the same time, they generally 46 Leon Dyczewski were well educated, which was exemplified by Erasmus of Rotterdam. Now, in our modern society, the technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia is formed by those who can easily shape the sphere of possessing, who can recognize human needs and satisfy them with new products, ideas, and behavior patterns. Owing to the technical-economicalmanagerial intelligentsia everyday life has become easier, more convenient and more pleasant; we move and communicate more quickly, we build nicer and safer houses, we furnish our flats in a better and nicer way, and we adjust our surroundings to our needs in a more functional way. Wherever this type of intelligentsia has developed earlier, the objective world is better organized and cleaner, more colorful and convenient, betteroff and safer; the power of human muscles is ever more often replaced with robots, and tiring intellectual work by electronic devices. Infant mortality has decreased and life expectancy has increased; the life of animals is also protected. In the most developed countries the natural environment becomes more and more subjected to man. The yearly industrial emission of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere has fallen in the USA from 1970 to 1995 by half; the degree of air contamination with lead compounds has decreased by more than 90%. At the end of the twentieth century Western Europe's afforestation rate was 30% greater than 50 years earlier. (cf. Bielecki: 72). Seeing the achievements of the technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia and making use of them, Karl Popper had good reasons to state in his speech on the occasion of being awarded an honorary doctorate by the Eichstätt University in July 1991, \"I am living in the happiest world we have yet had.\" This world is happy also for us. But is it happy in all its fields and for everybody? Surveys conducted in many countries show that the number of suicides, of people feeling lonely, and of people with drug addiction has increased; also, the number of serious violations of accepted moral norms, assaults, and murders has increased, which has resulted in overcrowded prisons. Unemployment and poverty are lasting phenomena even in the wealthiest societies. The number of homeless people grows (at present in Poland it is estimated that there are about 300,000 such people); they beg for any meal, so that they will not die. There are more and more people and families who do not participate in public life even in the most democratic societies. About two thirds of the children in Polish schools are undernourished. A great number of children are sexually abused, which means that something noble and magnificent is poisoned and killed in them by those who have power over them, who have money and an unrestrained lust for pleasure. When in all the modern world there is talk about human rights, about cooperation, peace, and unity, on the borderlands of young African countries, on the Israeli-Arab borderland, in the countries of North Africa, the wars continue. In all European countries with a Christian tradition that is many centuries old and that defends life with the commandment \"thou shall not kill\" that admits no exceptions, the killing of Man in Contemporary Culture 47 unborn babies has been legalized. After the introduction of the abortion law, first in the socialist countries, and then from 1967 gradually in the countries of Western Europe, the principle of absolute protection of human life from its conception to a natural death has been violated. Man's fundamental value, which is human life, has been gradually relativized, only ensuring possibly the best conditions for killing unborn babies at the wish of their mothers, or for killing people who are already grown up, at their own wish. The facts that have been quoted here as examples indicate that not all people living in this affluent world are happy. There are still \"the equal\" and \"the more equal.\" It is just that the \"more equal\" wear other colors and have their clothes sewn in a new way, not as in the past. Moreover, because of new techniques of manipulation and propaganda, many of them are elected to posts giving them power by the poor and by those who are not well aware of what the situation actually is. Many enlightened Europeans have forgotten that Europe, having experienced the death of more than 167 million people during the two world wars through Nazi crimes of genocide and Stalinist purges, not so long ago defended human life in a determined and devoted way. The progress of knowledge, technology, organization, moral liberalism, and freedom of speech has weakened the tough pro-life position in Europeans' awareness and conscience. In this way, the poet Bolesław Leśmian's statement that \"one never dies sufficiently\" has become true in the last three decades. Now people die in large numbers not only biologically, but spiritually as well, for many of them lose the meaning of life. Also, nature dies on a large scale. American scientists warn that the exploitation of the natural environment will cause extinction in the current century of half of the 30 million species living now. Many people do not ask themselves the questions about what nature is for, what ties connect them with it, how they should live in harmony with it, or in what condition they will leave nature to the next generations. We do not mean to depict a bleak picture of our times here. Death has always been an inevitable phenomenon: throughout history, children have been dying, complete cities and whole tribes have died out, numerous species of plants and animals have become extinct. But the proportions the phenomenon of death has reached are greater today and they have peculiar features. Here are some of them: 1. Owing to the development of knowledge of the processes of life and death, as well as to new technologies, it is possible today to put someone to death causing less pain; the necessity of precipitating or delaying it may be justified by many reasons, even humanitarian ones, which in effect may weaken the opposition to killing even whole categories of people and of social groups, if somebody wants to do so because of economic, political, religious, racist, or other reasons. 2. Admittedly, in the past people were killed, but the act of killing was opposed by the general public, and those who did it were not welcome even in their own circles. This is why the names of executioners were not revealed, 48 Leon Dyczewski and why they were often brought from other towns, or even from foreign countries, and why during the execution their faces were often hidden. Today, putting people to death is legalized, and those who do it belong to the ones who are well paid and the public opinion does not stigmatize them. At present \"death-mongers\" often have very good posts in the society. From a very early age, for many hours a day, we are being acclimated to killing and to not reacting to it, by programs of almost all television channels and by many \"favorite\" films. We have become so used to this that the owners of TV channels and cinemas state that they just give what people want. 3. Scientists, acknowledged experts working on inventing and producing lethal weapons as well as businessmen trading them, belong to the groups in modern societies that earn the most money; and so what they do – their job – is desired by many young people who do not fully realize what the results of such work may be. Considering all these and also other phenomena Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker stated during the meeting of intellectuals in August 1985 in Castel Gandolfo: \"We are living at the threshold of a global crisis, perhaps the most horrifying one in the history of the human race.\" And it is horrifying first of all because it does not only concern \"individuals, but societies, or even the whole of humanity. In the coming crisis the whole of humanity may die out\" (Weizsäcker: 13), because the crisis has seized man himself, which is not understood by many people. And what is not understood is also not respected. Death casts a shadow over human life and the life of all nature, and hence the term used by Blessed John Paul II \"civilization of death\" with respect to our times, our culture, is well justified. Summing up the twentieth century, Józef Kozielecki writes sadly: \"in the colors of the past I can notice more grey and black colors than fair and white ones\" (Kozielecki (2): 7). This may be why modern man, despite so many achievements, \"cannot be pleased,\" as Antoni Kępiński states. And the poet Bolesław Leśmian says and asks: \"This is the way the world is! It is a bad world! Why isn't there another world?\" (1936). Despite the magnificent achievements in many branches of life, phenomena can also be seen that signal a crisis of modern European culture. But do they signify its fall? What attitude should we assume toward them? Surely not the one that is manifested in excluding oneself from public life and escaping into the safe retreat of one's own mind, one's flat, or one's warm circle of friends. This is what, for instance, Martin Heidegger did; at the beginning of the Nazi rule in Germany he became actively involved in shaping the new reality (he was a member of the NSDAP, and his speeches made in those years even today cause hot disputes and controversies). However, he soon backed out of public work and took shelter in the charming Schwarzwald to wait there \"until everything that has been done, finally will be undone\" (Cz. Miłosz). Waiting for a better time for oneself is a sign of opportunism. The current social-cultural life of Europe reminds one of the Biblical text that is often read during prayers for a deceased person: \"Human life changes, Man in Contemporary Culture 49 but it does not end.\" This is also the case with culture, which changes, as long as a man is alive, and is an effect of \"human\" cognition and desire, of our human experiences, yearnings, and actions that are ever richer. It is not the first time that Europeans have experienced a crisis of culture. But their characteristic feature is also that they always want to overcome these crises and they do not surrender to depressive moods. The question keeps returning: \"Why isn't there another world?\" (Bolesław Leśmian), and Europeans search for that other world, and define its features. The shaping of a new world by Europeans is connected with noticing the shortcomings of the existing one, with its detailed analysis and with noticing new values. What threats do Europeans perceive in the world in which they live; what do they want to change and what are they aiming at; who is the leader in the way to a revival? Looking for an answer to these questions may help overcome the crises of culture. III. The world built by the technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia proves to be full of shortcomings and insufficient. It lacks philosophical, ethical, and religious reflection. It has first gotten rid of God, and now it is getting rid of man. As Thomas Merton remarks, the motto saying that \"science can do anything; it should do whatever it wants to; science is infallible and impeccable; anything science does is just. Hence a deed, however monstrous or criminal it is, cannot be undermined if it is justified by science\" (Merton: 110) has become a credo of the modern man. Progress, usefulness, functionality, competence, cost-effectiveness, efficiency, and the recently emphasized profit and pleasure are the criteria of the value of what science and technology give. So for the sake of these criteria, experiments are continually done in order to come up with new inventions, to work out new technologies, to formulate new rules of management, to create new forms of life, without looking at the costs and consequences for the life of individuals or societies, without looking at what is happening to the inner life of man, with his spiritual life, with his family, to his neighborly and social ties. Although the technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia has recently turned their interest to man himself, this has not happened in order to enrich him inwardly. They want to find out about the properties of the human organism and its body, to its needs and the ways it responds to stimuli, as well as to the techniques of affecting a man, in order to be able to impose some contents on others and to shape their consciousness, to control the processes of their development, to shape their needs and to more efficiently make them pursue defined objectives (e.g., to buy completely unnecessary things) in order to efficiently limit, when it is necessary, their freedom through various forms of organization and control. Representatives of the technical-economicalmanagerial intelligentsia today may quite easily manipulate people like objects, and this fact is at present recognized as the most dangerous one. The conviction appears that a man can heal, make happy, or save himself – all he needs to do is to learn proper technologies and the methods of their use; and if he is not able to learn and use them for himself he should trust those who have 50 Leon Dyczewski already mastered them. So a variety of therapeutic offices are opened that efficiently drive out man's more serious reflection on himself. Individual and social life based on science, technology, organization, and information has started being very pragmatic, expecting efficiency and profit, ever richer consumption and pleasure. Personalities with a narcissistic attitude have become common, ones idolizing themselves, focusing on pleasure, and being pleasure-seekers, with a kaleidoscope attitude having no system of values and norms. A constantly growing number of people are unable to control their own development or that of their dear ones, to solve tensions between themselves and their dear ones, to thoroughly understand and solve local and global conflicts. Even those who, because of their post or function are responsible for others, for the whole of social life, seek the popularity of their own person rather than the common good. Man has gained better living conditions, but questions about what he should and should not do have been weakened, or even completely silenced in him. Hence Józef Kozielecki thinks that contemporary man is infected by irresponsibility (Kozielecki (2): 8). He has become a personality without any property. Individuals with such a personality feel that they may do anything and they are able to do anything – including really heroic acts and mean deeds. Anybody may grab or bribe them. These are the consequences of the domination of the technicaleconomical-managerial intelligentsia in modern societies, as it knows perfectly well how to achieve particular effects, but they cannot give satisfactory answers to the questions: what value do the consequences of their work have? What do they ultimately serve? What does the idea of man as a spiritual-bodily whole mean for them? Who is man and what are his ultimate aims; what is the meaning of his life? The technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia is not able to answer these questions at all because it relies on the \"instrumental reason,\" as Max Horkheimer defines it. The instrumental reason develops necessary and wonderful instruments; but to what aim they may be used, what they can serve – these questions remain unanswered. They exceed the competencies of the technical-economical-managerial intelligentsia and they cannot be solved by this intelligentsia (Habermas). They have to be helped by another kind of intelligentsia. IV. In modern society there is a growing demand for people who holistically interpret themselves and the world. Many purportedly holistic theories are extremely popular today. A demand is also growing for spiritual life and for deep personal ties. Ever more distinctly, the so-called extramaterial values come into prominence. According to some sociologists, the \"silent revolution\" in modern societies shows that these values are becoming widespread; the revolution has started the formation of new life styles, fundamentally different from the ones that, characterized by a strong emphasis on possessing, passiveness, mediocrity, and sensuality, dominate at present. In modern societies ever more people, looking for extra-material values, wanting to move away from the consumerist life model and to overcome spiritual inertia, spend their holidays in monasteries or in religious groups with new Man in Contemporary Culture 51 forms of religiosity. Instead of the term \"progress\" – the motto of modernism – increasingly often the word \"limitation\" (Bell: 222) appears: limitation of economic growth, limitation of the destruction of the natural environment, disarmament or limitation of military forces, consumption limitation, limitation of treating a man at work and in political life as an object, limitation of willfulness of those who threaten social peace. The trend of the new culture developing under the banner of \"limitation\" is strengthened by various groups of the alternative culture. Many of them add to the limitations that have already been mentioned: the limitation of all stimulants for the benefit of freedom of decision and responsibility for one's behavior; the limitation of entertainment for the benefit of fun; the limitation of passive television and video watching for the benefit of talking to other people and of reflexive reading; limiting oneself to things that are really necessary in everyday life and not allowing the habit of buying kindled by aggressive advertising; limiting the use of the car, so as to use it only when it is indispensable, etc. People of the new culture aspire to develop spiritual values in themselves and in others; they form more human relations in social life. The limitations they undertake are only one of the ways to realize such an attitude in their lives. Artists, writers, journalists, professors of various specialties, health service workers, farmers, engineers, clergymen who criticize the ideals promoted by the technical-economic-managerial intelligentsia, and who assert the right to have respect for life and who stand up for the nature that is being destroyed, for axiology, and who sympathize with the weakest groups in society, are becoming increasingly popular. Their appeals defending human life and the natural environment that is being destroyed stir millions of people. Many of them head social movements and political parties. The significance of this type of people is great and seems to be increasing, because: 1. They treat a man as a whole, noticing his fundamental and developmental needs, his need to have ever better living conditions and his need for a meaning of life, his worldly needs and transcendent ones, his need to be himself and to creatively co-exist with others. 2. They interpret social life as a whole. In the process of innovation, especially technological, they perceive a man – a human person – as the subject and target of these changes. They strongly oppose all the signs of treating a man as an object. 3. They closely connect their personal life with social and state-building life. From these connections the sense of responsibility for the society and its future arises in them. Hence, they try to realize their own development in connection with the development of the holistically understood society. 4. They do not directly take part in the process of technological modernization and the rapid raising of living standards, and this allows them to keep a distance from these processes, to analyze and assess them more objectively. They are also outside the group of technocrats, managers, politicians, nouveau riches, and decision-makers of various types who, first of all, constitute the driving force of mainstream modern society. Thanks to this 52 Leon Dyczewski they are free and critical of the society in which they live. They observe the processes that take place in it and analyze their effects, assessing them and opposing them if they go in the wrong direction or their pace is wrong; in other words – they oppose them if they threaten a man's individual and social life, or, in fact, not only a man's life, but life in general. 5. They think globally and they act locally. Hence, they have much insight into their society as a whole and into the problems of the world; they feel ties with all people, they do not exclude any countries, any races, nations, or social groups from the field of their concern. Working in their local communities, they continually shape areas of human life. They do something for human ecology, not only conducting armchair-conference talks and discussions. 6. They stand up for observing the rules of ethics in all the domains of individual and social life; also – and this is now stressed especially strongly – for particularly observing the rules of ethics in economy and politics which, it seems, have broken away from the norms of ethics, accepting the rules of economic and efficient action. 7. They are sensitive to the transcendent world, to values, to religious figures and events. Even if they do not accept Christianity as the foundation of their lives, they increasinly and willingly reach for the Gospel, looking for indications for themselves there; they perceive Christianity better and more fully as a creative factor of European culture (Habermas, Ratzinger). All those who represent this kind of attitude form a peculiar category of people that conventionally may be called the \"intelligentsia of life\" (Dyczewski). It holistically interprets man and the world; it defends life and consolidates it in all its forms and developmental stages. It is exactly this intelligentsia that most often opposes plans formulated by the technicaleconomic-managerial intelligentsia and its actions, as well as the effects of those plans and actions. The activity of many groups aiming at limiting the development of nuclear energy and of experimenting in the field of genetics is a perfect example here. Genetic engineering opens great possibilities to people, but it also carries the greatest threats for them. These possibilities are noticed by those who still have a living and versatile imagination, who apart from the flesh and blood see something more in man, who very well realize that the spiritual development of man most fully happens in the most natural conditions. No laboratory, even a perfect one, can replace the mother's and father's warm care, as it is the parents who give life to a new human being and care about his development. More and more people are convinced that \"such features of man as the skill of giving and taking, responsibility, the ability to make sacrifices and to give help, may only be shaped in the family\" (Gatterburg). Many abandon the slogans promoted by Rainer Langhans and Fritz Teufel in the 1960s: \"never more family, never more Germany.\" Although divorces often happen, the advantages of a lasting marriage and family for the development of an adult person and a child are ever more strongly emphasized: \"Children coming from divorced families have more Man in Contemporary Culture 53 troubles with learning and with establishing contacts; they show the tendency to take drugs and to commit crimes. And since they most often grow without fathers, they look for personal models in the street\" (Gatterburg). Those who belong to the intelligentsia of life are present in every country today. They protest against destroying the natural environment. They struggle for the life of every individual starting from conception to his/her natural death, and they actively join those who try to ensure adequate conditions for this development. They oppose legalization of euthanasia and experimenting with human embryos. They seek safer, more hygienic, and esthetic work conditions. They popularize a reflexive type of thinking and a creative lifestyle, opposing the consumerist style and passiveness. The consequences of the explosion of the nuclear power plant in Chernobyl and the catastrophe of the nuclear power plant in Japan, the experiments in the field of genetics, the pollution of the natural environment, all these show that the technological-economic-organizational development must have its limits. If they are exceeded they could threaten the health of mankind; they can cause the relativization of the fundamental principles of life, death, or even destruction of a part of humanity and of the cultural heritage. The intelligentsia of life demands respecting the old principle: man should not do everything he can do. In order to remind modern man about exactly this principle, to show man more holistically, to protect him from various kinds of abuses that come from science, technology, and organization, all sorts of institutions, associations, and organizations have come into being. Among others, on March 11, 1996 in Delaware, USA, the Institute for Frontier Science was established. As its objectives it sets: 1. Demanding that research, education, and information exchange in all key branches of science and health take into consideration bioelectromagnetic determinants, various forms of energy, and holistically healthful aspects; 2. Studying connections between the body, psyche, and soul, as well as between various states of awareness; 3. Building communication and cooperation between researchers, scientists, doctors, politicians, and those who understand the need of limitation of research fields and can do something in this domain; 4. Facilitating the use of new achievements in order to improve the holistically understood health of man, as well as to integrate medicine in its different branches, conventional and scientific medicine. Soon after the Institute was established, more than 3000 researchers, intellectuals, and doctors joined it (Neues). Even though the intelligentsia of life is not as wealthy as the technicaleconomic-managerial intelligentsia, and it is not in power now, its significance is great and it is going to increase. It forms a sort of alternative culture with respect to the one that today is formed by technicians, economists, managers, and politicians. It formulates ideas for social revival and restoration of the proper place for the human person in the world of things and institutions, in which it is easy to get lost. It is also a significant pressure group that influences the technical-economic-managerial intelligentsia; and it is not the latter, as it was thought in the 1960s and even in the 1970s, but the intelligentsia of life 54 Leon Dyczewski that is going to have the final word in the modern society, so that it will be more and more numerous and conscious of its tasks. V. The technical-economic-managerial intelligentsia and the intelligentsia of life need not form an antagonistic arrangement in modern society. Both these categories of people are necessary and they both form the creative class in it. The former one shapes the living conditions, and the latter one creates an order in them, evaluates them, and makes a point of a man not becoming the tool of his own products, so that he could live in all the spheres of his personality and develop it in a versatile manner. The intelligentsia of life has a peculiar mission in the modern society: to propagate the love of life, its protection, to guard the inviolability of life-guiding principles, and to organize the best possible conditions for its development. So if the technical-economicmanagerial intelligentsia first of all creates a world of things that is rather cold and impersonal, the intelligentsia of life complements it with the warmth of interpersonal and inter-group relations, ones based on respect for every man, for justice, peace, and love. A perfect symbiosis of these two social groups will be realized by a citizen of modern society, if on his desk he will have a computer – the symbol of the technical-economic-managerial intelligentsia – and the Decalogue complemented with Jesus Christ's Eight Blessings – the symbol of the intelligentsia of life. Then one will be able to be sure that man and culture will develop in the proper way, which means that man will know what to do and how to do it; he will use the goods he has in order \"to be more humane.\" Combining science and technology harmoniously with religious postulates, so that people could be moderate in gathering material goods and could be open to others, so that they could sympathize with others, cry and be happy with others, so that they observe the principles of justice, and be people of pure heart and patience, so that they introduce peace into the life of others – this behavior is that which will determine the prosperity and well-being of society. The intelligentsia of life complements the technical-economicmanagerial intelligentsia with the world that escapes the research done by empirical sciences on which the latter is based. The norms contained in the Decalogue and the supernatural world are not the field of studies of empirical sciences, but this does not mean that they do not exist and that they should not be recognized, for it is them, these norms that contain the sense of truth and falsehood and of good and evil, that give man the feeling of certainty when choosing the right way, that give him the sense of community with others, that develop in him the longing for something more noble and more magnificent, that give human life its ultimate meaning. Then man knows and feels that he may not do anything that does not agree with this meaning. If people of this type of thinking organize social development, we may be confident of its direction, forms, and pace. Man will be its center and one would find such fundamental values as truth, good, and beauty (the old-Greek triad of values), faith, hope, and love (the Christian triad of values), freedom, equality, and brotherhood (the triad of values of the modern societies), the dignity of the Man in Contemporary Culture 55 human person, pluralism, and solidarity (the contemporary triad of values) in the proper places. Only then, instead of the \"civilization of death,\" the \"civilization of love\" will be developed. There is a variety of ways of educating both kinds of the creative class in modern society. The following ways seem to be the most certain: 1. Promoting education of the university type in the society, containing the science of man, the social sciences, and ethics, so that in the education process the university graduates could internalize the fundamental human values, human rights, and the rules of peaceful coexistence. 2. Forming hobbies, developing esthetic sensibility, so that life could be more interesting, cheerful, and pleasant. 3. Securing the possibility of continuing education and propagating a style of life that would integrate it as a fundamental element. 4. Shaping the identity (of sex and age as well as the local and national identity; the identity concerning the world view and religion) so that there would be as few dull individuals as possible. A man who has a distinct individual and collective identity is characterized by a sense of his own value and openness to others. He is able to have a dialogue with others. He has the sense of responsibility for the effects of his actions. 5. Teaching how to skillfully combine one's own cultural heritage with modernity and other societies' cultures. 6. Shaping the skill of finding peaceful solutions to difficult, critical, and conflictual situations. 7. Making possible the widespread availability of aids for those who have problems; making people look for solutions to complicated problems. Such situations facilitate a better acquaintance among people and an increase of the sense of responsibility. 8. Shaping the attitude of altruism and of willingness to collectively aid those who cannot cope with their lives and need help. 9. Shaping an open attitude toward spiritual values, toward the supernatural world, and toward God. Department of Sociology of Culture John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin Lublin, Poland dycz@kul.lublin.pl\n\nCHAPTER IV PERSON AND PERSONAL REALITY: THE ACTUALITY OF THE EASTERN CHRISTIAN UNDERSTANDING OF MAN1 DAN CHIŢOIU Abstract: This article aims at assessing the vision of man that the Eastern Christian tradition proposes, by understanding man as person. This notion is the result of the need the authors from the Patristic period had in describing the Christian perspective on man. The Patristic notion of person, first stated by Gregory of Nyssa and Basil the Great, received subsequent nuances and explanations with Byzantine authors, starting with Maxim the Confessor through Gregory Palamas' period. Modernity took over the notion of person and used it, answering some needs especially present in psychology and social sciences. But the significance of the notion of person in the modern context is different from the one in the Eastern Christian environment. The actuality of this Eastern understanding of man is revealed when there appeared explanatory needs which can no longer be satisfied by the anthropological modern paradigms. The recovery of a whole vision on man may find its sources in the Patristic and Byzantine description of man as person: this description affirms the person not as a psychological aspect but as a notion through which a reality is described, the sum of everything that man means and more. From this perspective, the person must be understood as a form of reality, nothing less than the physical reality, but which additionally has the possibility of freedom. It is, therefore, a reality that changes itself. Keywords: Eastern Christian tradition, person, spiritual freedom. Nowadays, the current progress of experimental research leads to the formation of a much wider vision of the physical universe, and also to a deeper understanding of the human being. We can better understand the extraordinarily complex processes present in the human body, and we have begun to have a consistent understanding of the subtle interactions between body and mind. The experimental results provided in research in neuroscience have as a consequence the abandonment of the paradigm explaining the human being present both in science and philosophy in the last two centuries. It is, in the first place, about leaving behind a famous 1 Aknowledgment: This paper was written within The Knowledge Based Society Project supported by the Sectorial Operational Program Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), financed by the European Social Fund, and by the Romanian Government under the contract no. POSDRU ID 56815. 58 Dan Chiţoiu duality of modern philosophy: the body-soul. After Descartes (in Meditationes de Prima Philosophia in 1641, where he talked about a total and absolute distinction between mental and material substance), philosophy began to deal even less with the body-soul distinction. This was due to the use of the soul concept, which was no longer held to be consistent with philosophical discourse. Immanuel Kant, for example, accepts only a weak use of the soul notion as an element of philosophical discourse. For the German philosopher, the soul is not demonstrable on the path of reason, although he considers that the mind must inevitably reach the conclusion that it exists: it is a prerequisite for the development of ethics and religion. Subsequently, William James sees the soul as a mere collection of mental phenomena: there is no consistency of the soul concept. After Descartes, there was a preference for the mind concept, the human dimension understood as possessing self-reflexivity and intentionality. For philosophy, the question of the relationship between body, organs, and mind meant a revision of several dichotomies that described man with a double meaning: first, the mind could not be described as an intangible or of an incorporeal nature, and second, the mind may not have any other support than the body; the experiments in neuroscience have provided strong evidence of the material support of the mind. The soul concept started to be used only in spirituality, and this fact is due mainly to the direction taken by science since the seventeenth century, when the description of reality starts to be made by reducing it to what is measurable. The soul cannot be investigated by the Galilean type of science, the one that understands reality as schematic by way of mathematical devices. Such a direction imposed the use of a generic concept of matter as the universal constituent of reality (plus the energy related concept, later). Today there is a giving up of the search for evidence of the soul's existence by science: that happened during the time since Descartes. In other words, it was not a denial of the soul's existence, but the suspension of the discussion about it in terms of science. In modern times, the place of discussions on the soul is taken by science and by psychology. But it is another approach and content: psychology affirms that that the soul cannot be an object of study in any way, even indirectly; instead, it deals with the description of cognitive processes, the nature of emotions, etc. These developments inevitably bring a crisis in the understanding of man, not a crisis in the description of its functionality, but in terms of understanding its nature. Giving up the vision of the soul-body dualism is a plus in terms of explaining the data obtained by experimental investigation, but retains a degree of impairment in formulating an anthropological vision, as is required in philosophy. There have been other perspectives coming from philosophy in the last half century, proposing an answer to this need, albeit sometimes indirectly. This is the case in French phenomenology which, through its representatives, Michel Henry, Jean-Luc Marion, and Jean-Yves Lacoste, The Actuality of the Eastern Christian Understanding of Man 59 takes a direction that leaves the search for a human essence in favor of a radical phenomenology. Henry, referring to the Gospel of John, says that man should not be understood as a body possessing a soul, but as an embodied being. What should characterize the man's life is not the biological instinct, but the power to try himself. Such an assertion is based on a distinction between the body (corps) and flesh (chair). The body is the inert body of universe, which does not try and does not feel anything, a composition of physical chemical elements of our material dimension. The flesh is trying to, suffering, and enjoying, is able to feel that it is outside the body, to touch it and be touched. The incarnation of the Logos in the Gospel announcement indicates, according to Henry, a definition of man as embodied. The statement \"The Logos became flesh\" is opposed to the definition of the human being in the classical Greek conception, where the body was associated with animality. The French phenomenologist thinks that the Gospel message contains an entirely new definition, different from the Greek and Modern descriptions: a definition of the man as invisible, yet earthy, invisible as a flash.2 A similar definition can be found in the texts of authors who have been involved in what is called the neo-Patristic movement: George Florovsky, Justin Popovici, and Dumitru Stăniloae. There is a similarity with the French phenomenological approach: there is provided an anthropology exceeding the soul-body dualism, starting with a certain reading of the Gospel, as well as texts of Patristic authors. The neo-Patristic movement consists of the need to revive the authentic spirit of textual sources belonging to the first Christian horizon. This is due to the finding that, in the interval that followed the Renaissance, the Christian anthropological perspective received influences not related to the Tradition of the Fathers. This situation was seen as existing not only in Eastern Christianity, but also in the Christian West. The perspective offered by Stăniloae has a special significance, indicating a radical solution in describing the notion of the human being. Stăniloae offers an interpretation of the central concepts belonging to the Patristic tradition, an interpretation which aims at responding to the recent needs of understanding the human dimension of reality, an interpretation that proves its timeliness and potential. The Romanian author expresses the most coherent and consistent recovery of the Patristic meaning of person, but with terms belonging to twentieth century philosophy, including Martin Heidegger's philosophy. The term 'person' comes from the Latin persona, as a translation of what the Greek Fathers understood as the true designation of man, by linking two concepts formerly working in the Greek lexicon: hypostasis and prosopon. The Patristic authors of the fourth century found themselves needing to describe man as bearing the image of God and having additional 2 Michel Henry, Incarnation. Une Philosophie de la Chair (Paris: Seuil, 2000), p. 43. 60 Dan Chiţoiu freedom. The Greek classicism did not know the idea of freedom, especially regarding man, because it is dominated by the idea that the world is a 'cosmos,' an order that cannot miss anything. Man's freedom came into conflict with the harmony and order dictated by moira. Thus Gregory of Nyssa and Basil took those two concepts frequently used at the time and used them in a different way. The idea of hypostasis was used within classical Greek philosophy and Hellenism as an equivalent to ousia, but had a number of nuances that reinforced a particular understanding of the reality essence. In the first centuries after Christ, the term received a more real and concrete meaning, that of a real being as opposed to the apparent and evanescent being. Gregory and Basil used this term in order to indicate a difference in the acceptance of such essences, thus indicating a way of being. The Cappadocian Fathers made a real and significant move in understanding the signification of the term: reality can only have a hypostatic dimension; there is no pure essence. However, the identification between hypostasis and prosopon is very significant. The term prosopon belonged to the old Greek vocabulary, and it signified the part of the head right under the forehead – what we call today 'face.' It was especially used to mean mask, as part of the props used by actors in the ancient Greek theater. According to Zizioulas, theater, and especially tragedy, was the meeting site for human freedom and the necessity under which the world stood in the old Greek vision.3 It is known that, from the perspective of Greek philosophy, one cannot find the grounds to argue about the real essence of the free human act, because what obsessed the mentality of Greek antiquity was the order and harmony of a world that was essentially cosmos. For the Greeks who lived during that age, the world necessarily obeyed the power of an order that was conceived from a logical perspective, which allowed no deviance from the laws of the harmony of the whole. Greek tragedy exploited the conflict between man's attempts to act according to his own will and to avoid his destiny, disregarding the gods' will, although this attitude was ultimately doomed to failure; the closing scene of an ancient tragedy always recorded the fulfillment of destiny. We are concerned here with what could be termed limited freedom, a phrase that represents, in fact, a logical contradiction. What matters is that the tragedy actor feels the significations of the freedom state, and steers – though in a limited and unsuccessful way – toward assuming the state of a person, characterized by freedom, uniqueness, and non-repeatability. The mask, in ancient tragedy, proves to be a superimposed element and not something that pertains to his true being. However, this meaning of prosopon was exploited by the Cappadocian Fathers in order to confer the desired dimension to the understanding of the personal modality of the existence of God in Trinity and of people. An identification of the two gives an ontological dimension to \"face\"; to what was previously a mere mask. It 3 Ioannis Zizioulas, Being as Communion: Studies in Personhood and the Church (New York: St. Vladimir`s Seminary Press, 1985), p. 32. The Actuality of the Eastern Christian Understanding of Man 61 is here not just a transmutation of understanding; it is the use of the words at another level: the movement from concept to sign. Stăniloae considered as a central aspect of his speech the recovery of the meaning of \"person.\" Modernity used the term with other interpretations, often indistinct, and confused it with the individual (in the experimental fields of humanities, especially in psychology, but also in ethics). Modernity has given \"person\" a psychological or ethical meaning. The understanding shown by Stăniloae recovers a parentage of Patristic terms in an ontological dimension, intending to describe the person as a matter of reality. Stăniloae disagrees with the opposition between nature and person; by giving a negative valence to nature, it means that the reference is made to the fallen nature, a disfigured state of nature, and he quotes Saint Irenaeus, who says that a fallen man is not a true man. The Romanian author insists that the person is nothing else but \"the actual existence of nature and people together comprised all of nature, giving it and receiving it mutually.\"4 \"Nature really persists in several hypostases endlessly rich and full in relationship between them.\"5 According to the exegesis in the Patristic literature, the fall of man, who had been nominated to rule over all Creation, brought about another state of the world, of the cosmos, affecting its each and every last stone. This conditioning that man with his thickened body starts to receive from nature is, after all, an effect of his own deeds. Fallen man's actual life on the earth means suffering and the pursuit of deliverance. This state has concrete consequences in man's complex relationship with what is called nature, and which includes his own corporeality. Christ's embodiment means the possibility to restore man's humanity, but only as something potential. This restoration becomes real in the concrete case of each man, not identically, but in agreement with the characteristic features of the uniqueness of each personal exercise of the freedom to be. Restoration must not be understood as man's return to what is proper to him, to his lost existential state; this change leads to another relationship and another way to exercise his influence on nature and on Creation. This change of relationship must be understood as real and not symbolic, as one that produces real and concrete effects in nature. The Patristic texts emphasize the fact that this is how man opens endless possibilities to bring about change and novelty in nature. This does not imply the flouting of nature's laws and rationality, but contributing to actualize the potencies that it contains and that otherwise would never have become manifested. The Patristic vision of the world was that it was created as a setting, as the site of encounter between persons. The world does not have a meaning and a purpose in itself; it exists with the purpose of creating deeper and more 4 Dumitru Stăniloae, Teologia Dogmatică Ortodoxă [Orthodox Dogmatic Theology] , vol. I (București : Editura Institutului Biblic și de Misiune al B.O.R., 1996), p. 278. 5 Ibidem. 62 Dan Chiţoiu effective possibilities for the encounter between persons – between the Persons of the Holy Trinity and people, as well as between people. This is due to the fact that the person is the reality of the highest existence degree, because it is aware of its existence and of the existence of persons and things. This is also due to the fact that the person exists as I, as you, or as he/she, as a conscience aiming toward another conscience, as Father Stăniloae stated.6 Thus, the determinism of nature, the existence of some laws of physical reality, is not an eternal given; it was modified when Adam fell, and it encounters continuous changes by the exercise of man's act of freedom, especially of the man who is on the restoration path. It would be more appropriate to talk not so much about natural laws as about the rationality of the world, or, to be more precise, the rationality of creation. When we talk about the rationality of the world we give a more adequate expression to the purposes for which the world received its existence, a world which, for the Judeo-Christians, cannot have, under any circumstances, a purpose and a meaning in itself, simply existing. If there are limits in Creation, and if they are not due to man's fall, then the understanding of the limit must be positive: it is a limit that creates the possibility of communion, of encounter, and that proves to engender an infinity of possibilities. This would be the meaning of some reasons for creation, of some logoi, as Maximus the Confessor calls them. Man's aim is definitely to overcome conditionings; this fact appears in the whole historical behavior of humanity. Throughout his whole history on the Earth, man has attempted by all means to go beyond his conditionings, dependences, and limitations. The fact that he makes science pertains to this need as well. According to Saint Maximus, man has a high calling: to mediate and to unite. Man is called to consistently integrate the macrocosm with the microcosm, the objective perspective with the subjective one, in a common vision of spiritual transitus. The natural tension in the macrocosm between sensitive and intelligible reality must be mediated in the human microcosm via the spiritual vocation that is proper to the man of ascetic practice and contemplation.7 This mediation and unification asks for an actual change in reality, at all levels, for a subtle modification of a constitutive element in each of the mediation terms. These are reasons for Stăniloae to indicate the person as having a kind of reality, even being the Reality. This centering of the person concept fulfills many needs. First, this is an understanding of human and humane meeting the explanatory requirements of recent philosophy. Second, it provides a wider perspective on reality, as it is now described in advanced scientific research, particularly in quantum physics. But it also offers a way 6 Dumitru Stăniloae, Studii de teologie dogmatică ortodoxă [Orthodox Dogmatic Theology Studies], (Craiova: Ed. Mitropolia Craiovei, 1990), p. 225. 7 Paul M. Blowers, Exegesis and Spiritual Pedagogy in Maximus the Confessor. An Investigation of the Quaestiones ad Thalassium (Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press, 1991), p. 131. The Actuality of the Eastern Christian Understanding of Man 63 of understanding the specifics of the cultural and spiritual area of the Christian East, the way of life of the Eastern man. With this understanding of the person can be justified the behavior the Eastern man, both at the individual level and the community one. If, for example, sin is not seen in this cultural area as a moral fact, but as having consequences at the ontological level (man does not \"stand,\" but moves up and down continuously), the consequences are diverse, complex, and sometimes paradoxical. Traces of the Patristic and Byzantine traditions occur in this type of assumption that clearly shows difference from other cultural areas. Romanian Academy Iaşi, Romania dan811@yahoo.com\n\nCHAPTER V MODERN SOCIETY AND ITS ETHICAL DILEMMAS1 CORNELIA GĂŞPĂREL Abstract: The world today is faced with a lack of current moral models, so moral principles are often used as weapons for labeling and balancing certain social, political, and economic circumstances existing in society. The presence in the social space of such problems leads to dilemmatic interpretations, susceptible to overshadowing the discipline and the model of social coexistence on which the entire legal system is based. The deontological codes that exist in the diversity of academic and institutional communities are just a brief insight into the meanings of the ethical principles. We note, however, that despite the emergence of new human rights, codes of conduct existing in Romanian space remain the same, and the institutions that create and apply them remain tributary to limited and time dependent interpretations. In this context, the notion of ethics is often misunderstood, because there is an exaggeration of certain limitations of actions and the interpretation can be guided by criteria that have no connection with the internal standard, that is, the principles of the Deontological Code. Contextuality can be the solution to a part of the ethical dilemmas, but it does not lead to logical indicators. One cannot bring too much criticism upon contextuality and upon its relativity of interpretation, as long as reality shows this can be the only viable solution. Human habit is for a person to reduce novelty in what he/she knows, in the idea of assimilation, which explains his/her aversion to everything that is new or requires the effort of thinking. Once assimilated, the novelty becomes active, so ethical reform in psychosocial research and practice consists in the removal of what is old and needs recontextualized, because we face new problems – genetic inventions, reordering of health insurance system, creation of new legal codes, etc. We therefore believe that \"Martin Cohen's 101 Ethical Dilemmas\" and Philip Zimbardo's failed \"Stanford Experiment,\" joining one stream or 1 Acknowledgement: This paper was written within the Knowledge Based Society Project supported by the Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), financed from the European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract number POSDRU ID 56815. 66 Cornelia Găşpărel another, whether it is utilitarianism, consequentialism, or professional ethics, configure only at a descriptive level the topics regarding the understanding of the purpose and of the ethical interpretation in the scientific society area which itself includes the contemporary one. The basis of this scientific paper is built on a series of psycho-philosophical coordinates which are focusing on the philosophical, hereditary, and neurological unconscious. Repositioning and analyzing the theories concerning unconscious have conscience as a starting point (in terms of moral and spiritual virtues), followed by the importance and the role of memory, which may or may not indicate the resources of will. In other words, we are talking about a different perspective on scientific and applied ethics, but the individuality of our current demarche brings the idea of enhancing morality by reconsidering the ontological structure (conscience) which may or may not justify equity in human relations. Keywords: ethical dilemmas, contemporary society, contextuality, moral and spiritual values, memory, will. FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE – ETHICAL ASPECTS OF CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY In analyzing how ethics is developed and reflected in the sensible world (in the Platonic meaning of the word) we must return to the issues of the moral foundation of any action. Simple, everyday actions are usually assigned value judgments based on common spirit, whose main attribute is to be moral. What is the source of these judgments, how can we assume the role of moral judges, and why do we consider the moral judgments of each of us to be universal? These are just some of the questions to which we should respond when we make a theoretical approach to morality. We consider ethics a scientific synthesis of all regulations, approaches, and attitudes based on moral sense. In most cases they have been theorized and transferred into practical systems whose utility is found in everyday life. Morality is the ability of a society, group, or person to assign value judgments in relation to a certain attitude, idea, or behavior by which they are accepted or rejected based on a contextual assessment scale. Objectivity in ethical analysis, whether we are talking about utilitarianism, legislative utilitarianism, multi-leveling actional utilitarianism, motivational and of character, biographic utilitarianism, or consequentialism (value – effect), more often focuses on the welfare and benefit of the largest possible group of humans, but from our point of view, this analysis should also focus on the value of the moral agent to determine the balance of power in the analysis and interpretation of actions. \"If morality would not involve human passions and our life in general,\" Noica asserts, \"then it could be as rigorous and safe as any other Modern Society and its Ethical Dilemmas 67 deductive science.\"2 To some extent, this explains the relativism of interpretations from the social and scientific context, whether we refer to: 1. the legal system – the intentionality and the degree of social risk (socio-historical context) that are indicators, on which the legal classification of the action and of the perpetrator of the act is based; 2. the health system – the principle of liability that tends to create prerequisites for reordering the criteria for granting health insurance or, 3. research and experiments which are carried out within scientific communities and which may be questionable from an ethical point of view, although they apparently follow a series of ethical guidelines or principles. In this context of debate and analysis of contemporary society and its ethical dilemmas existing in various scientific and institutional contexts, the question should rather be \"What is not ethics?\" to deduce what it is. To this question P. Singer identifies an answer and refers to a set of benchmarks:  \"The first thing to say about ethics is that it is not a set of prohibitions particularly concerned with sex.\"  \"Second, ethics is not an ideal system that is noble in theory but no good in practice.\"  \"Third, ethics is not something intelligible only in the context of religion. I shall treat ethics as entirely independent of religion.\"  \"The fourth, and last, claim about ethics that I shall deny in this opening chapter is that ethics is relative or subjective.\" By these statements Singer creates the conditions for a better understanding of the role of the moral agent, whose profile is outlined by John Stuart Mill. Mill says every human action has three dimensions or aspects to be pursued: \"its moral aspect, or that of its right and wrong; its aesthetic aspect or that of its beauty; and its sympathetic aspect, or that of its lovableness. The first addresses itself to our reason and conscience, the second to our imagination, the third to our human fellow feeling. According to the first, we approve or disapprove, according to the second, we admire or despise, according to the third, pity or dislike.\"3 This new interpretation in which the importance falls on the person, the intention, and the act, leads us to assessing the role and the importance of the moral agent, which brings us closer to the question of what it means to be moral. And so the myth of Gyges in Plato's Republic is updated, 2 Constantin Noica, Mathesis sau bucuriile simple (București: Editura Humanitas, 1992), p. 89. 3 John Stuart Mill, \"Bentham,\" in The Collected Works, ed. J.M. Robson., Vol. 10 (London and New York, Routledge, 1974), p. 112. 68 Cornelia Găşpărel identifying the moral agent with the holder of the ring that makes you invisible. In this context you can be free to judge good and evil and to act. Therefore, to judge the morality of a person one must consider this possibility of total freedom, for to be right, you must act morally under any circumstances. In other words, the moral man is the righteous man whose profile we otherwise find in Plato's Republic. The difference between the righteous man (good) and the one who is unjust (bad) would be that the righteous man has to be right and not to seem right. \"There must be no seeming, for if he seem to be just he will be honored and rewarded, and then we shall not know whether he is just for the sake of justice or for the sake of honors and reward; therefore, let him be clothed in justice only, and have no other covering; and he must be imagined in a state of life the opposite of the former. Let him be the best of men, and let him be thought the worst; then he will have been put to the proof; and we shall see whether he will be affected by the fear of infamy and its consequences. And let him continue thus to the hour of death; being just and seeming to be unjust. When both have reached the uttermost extreme the one of justice and the other of injustice, let judgment be given which of them is happier of the two.\"4 In a recent theoretical view of ethics, the righteous man is under the veil of ignorance that allows him to be right because he chooses to be in this way. The Myth of Gyges conveys surprisingly well the case of the moral agent and of his report to the world and his fundamental role. There is a representation of the situation of the absolute freedom of choice between what is right and what is wrong, between good deeds and bad deeds, without any social constraints. But in this situation Gyges prefers to do what is considered to be immoral, to deceive, to kill, and to steal, rather than opposing such trends. We may conclude that three main ideas are to be found here, namely: man is prone to commit evil, injustice, rather than its opposite; committing good deeds does not have a source in benevolence, but rather in constraints; and, last but not least, a man performs a righteous act because he is unable to do an injustice. Morality is manifested in individual forms until the occurrence of an external evaluation, when there is a certain inhibition and a deformation of the social self from the desire of compliance and submission to social norms and values. In other words man often shows an intended good behavior from his desire not to be subjected to public opprobrium or of social norms, but we have no guarantee that without censorship, his feelings and reactions are moral. The trial of Socrates remains a testimony to the fact that morality is the basis for the harmony and communion between people, but it also can be a primary source of legal fault. In his old age, Socrates was on trial on 4 Plato, The Republic of Plato 361 c-d translated by B. Jowett, (Oxford: 1888), pp. 40-41. Modern Society and its Ethical Dilemmas 69 grounds of immorality and was subsequently convicted. The accusations against him were that: Socrates does not recognize the gods of the city; Socrates brings new gods; Socrates corrupts the youth. A brief analysis of these charges demonstrates the subjectivity of the accusers who are dominated by passion (Meletius), envy (Lycon), ignorance (Anytos), and the immorality which leads to a crime on the judges' part. In this case we can clearly see where the interpretation and the subjectivity of analysis of some moral guilt in relation to the legal system – that is to the law – can lead. The philosophers of that time had a certain attitude toward the gods, so Socrates was not the only one who could be accused of impiety. Moreover, Socrates acknowledged the gods, but did not accept the traditional anthropomorphic divine figures that outlined a profile of less morality. The second accusation shows and justifies the Socratic argument in the sense that by word, man can be corrupted and hence this can lead to a vice of interpretation. Introducing new gods leads to interpretations in a society like that of Socrates, and that is because the daimon to which he calls in his demarches is actually his conscience and thus the obvious manifestation of his respect to the gods. The last blame brought to Socrates refers to the fact that he corrupted young people through his discourses and teachings, therefore he was a danger to society. Against all these accusations Socrates defends himself and reveals the substrates that stand behind them, but eventually accepts the sentence to be poisoned. But his conscience, his daimon, advises him, after a life in service of teaching people about virtue, to choose death and to respect the laws. Socrates knows that morality and dignity are most important and he is not afraid of the crowd and of the trial to which he is subjected, because he knows that the crowd is the least able to give an opinion. What is valuable at the time of his conviction and after his death is his teaching, the human mind and, by that, the consciousness of living \" according to goodness.\" ETHICAL DILEMMAS – SOCIETY-PERSON-MORAL AGENT This triad of \"society-person-moral agent\" that we bring into question in this analysis of contemporary society in terms of ethical dilemmas has its justification in the degree of intentionality, in the responsibility of the society, and of the individual that loses the status of person in a consumption society that stands under the sign of globalization. Therefore a repositioning of the human being to society is necessarily required to see to what extent the existing ethical guidelines values and protects it or exposes it to dissolution by the loss of the self-report which immediately contains \"other.\" Man often judges emotionally and without empathy to others, which is why there is a justification in part for the lack of logic in the analysis of moral behaviors contained in social relations. Deontical logic is 70 Cornelia Găşpărel hardly accessible to the crowd, because we deal there with specific passions and specific levels of understanding, for which the existence of ethical dilemmas is justified. Orientations such as utilitarianism, consequentialism, and professional ethics justify and cover psychosocial problems, but do not confer determined ethical indicators of logic in the analysis of cause-effect, intention-act, or consciousness-unconsciousness. The bridge dilemma demonstrates, by successive crossings from professional ethics to utilitarianism and consecintionalism, the fact that there are problematic situations in current life in which, regardless of any type of decision one might make, a human sacrifice takes place. Man is suggestive and often provides emotional and less rational responses. The bridge dilemma5 described by Cohen refers to the fact that a wagon out of control is likely to kill more people. Fred sees that and is able to report to the mechanic to avoid the accident. The problem here is: if the wagon goes left five people are killed and if it goes to the right one person is killed. The question here is that of stopping the wagon. What can be done in such a situation? The second part of the dilemma ignores the first part of it and describes Fred as being in the position to warn the others, but having no means by which to be seen and identified. The lack of an object to help him draw the attention to himself leads him to think that he could push the young man who was near him. And the dilemma ends with the response that Cohen and others have tried to find as a middle solution to this dilemma. Cohen's answer is less relevant in this respect and what becomes important is the perception of individuals about the situation itself. And the people's answer is surprising, because they claim that Fred should have signaled, but should not have pushed the young man. According to philosophers and psychologists, people's judgment is intuitive and emotional. They adopt the utilitarian principle, on one hand, but refuse to push the young man in front of the wagon, invoking the idea that it is immoral to take a human life. On the other hand, they can change their point of view choosing the Kantian direction, thinking that the categorical principle is inviolable. Therefore they are at first rational and then emotional, but the final effect is the same – the disappearance of a man in favor of the survival of five people. In terms of consequentialism, the effects are arithmetically equivalent, hence the idea of the double effect doctrine. The dilemma itself is perhaps one of the most difficult, because of trying to pass through these three orientations: ethical, utilitarian, and consequentialist. The lack of transparency of some of the actions results in a subjectivization of choices and in a certain mental relativism, which leads to what philosophers call the double effect doctrine. According to the double effect, one and the same action may be regarded as moral in one 5 Martin Cohen, 101 Ethical Dilemmas (London and New York: Routledge, 2007), p. 12. Modern Society and its Ethical Dilemmas 71 sense and immoral in another. The consequences of the double effect can lead to relativism and to that subjectivity which some ethicians are reluctant to use in their analysis, but in practice are sometimes unable to avoid. For example, bombing a restaurant where there are terrorists is considered permissible and moral, but bombing a restaurant by terrorists who attack the U.S. is seen as negative and is not allowed. Zigmunt Bauman6 thinks that we are not moral because of the society (we are only ethical or obey the laws because of the society); but rather, \"we live in society\" and also \"we are society,\" thanks to the fact that we are moral. Still, above all there is a balance of power between man's moral sense and the requirements of the social moral model. The current approach in deontical logic requires a new interpretation, which does not exclude or annihilate the previous one, but makes it more accessible, in that it does not aim to facilitate the moral requirements or reduce their number, but attempts to provide an opportunity to be more moral. The current focus of professional ethics wants to be one that gives importance to vocation, because in relation to human beings, what becomes of great value is sympathy (love) for and understanding of the other in a way that does not affect one's moral self and much less one's own life. Peter Singer, in his attempt to show what ethics is not (based on the 10 sins according to the Christian perspective), concludes that ethics is not a system of noble theories without application. For this he refers to the meaning of lies in different contexts. He says that normally it is not right to lie, but in a situation like wartime, telling Gestapo that you do not house a Hebrew family is, rather, a moral action. Compliance with professional ethics does not also ensure maximum effectiveness of the intervention in the psyche and human condition. All social institutions backed by coercive measures were based and rely on the assumption that one cannot make good choices (whether good is interpreted as good for the person or good for the community or both at the same time). In the absence of a moral model, of clear ethical coordinates, and therefore of a continuous change in what do we interpret as being good and moral, we ask ourselves: what are the directions of orientation and the manners to correct behavior in interpersonal dialogue and coexistence? The answer always implies considering the context, which can be defined by professional ethics, consequentialism, or utilitarianism. In a community of specialists a series of rules and principles are working, while in a society, professional ethics and, in this case, the code of ethics, lose their utility, due to criteria that may depend on the utilitarian or consequentialist analysis. This relativism created by the context or societies is also found in Cohen's collection of ethical dilemmas. Through his 101 ethical dilemmas, Cohen describes current society issues, which allows not only a deontological analysis, but also an ethical analysis of context and of 6 Zigmunt Bauman, Etica postmodernă (Timişoara: Editura Amarcord, 2000), p. 68. 72 Cornelia Găşpărel situation, meaning the promotion of practical wisdom, which involves the ability to predict effects and to make analogies to other situations, to be fair in relation to the others, but not without affection. He draws attention to the validity of the deontological analysis but subtly shows its effects, because complying with the code of conduct leads to lack of action, to a certain passivity with negative effects. The usefulness and practicality of moral actions do not only make ethics vulnerable, because their purpose is not to present the advantages and disadvantages of actions, even if we are in an era of negotiations, but rather to determine the awareness of the existence of morality as part of human nature existing in the natural human fund. However, this is not enough, because today's society needs more to deliberate on what is/is not moral and to assimilate morality as something vital in relation to self and others. Pragmatism focuses more on numbers and less on debt criterion, because most of the time the usefulness of action upon the most people is considered, and the debt criterion becomes an adjacent aspect. In the construction and the maintenance of social space as a cognitive process, in its essence, feelings are either suppressed or – when indicated – reduced to a secondary role. The trials and misfortunes of the creation of space are primarily cognitive: the most common and most relevant of its endemic sufferings is cognitive confusion: the imprecision of rules, the weakness in the ignorance of the ways to move forward.7 The metaphor according to which rich countries have no responsibility for the situation of poor countries produces a cognitive dissonance which, being brought to a broad sense, might cause a certain acceptance. In other words, if the same situation would be considered in another context, uncertainty would disappear. The saving from drowning8 of a larger number of people against a smaller group of people could be seen as an ethical action based on the principle of utility. According to this principle, I will save as many people as I can afford to save without endangering others. The risks which are produced, though, by such an analysis show that utilitarianism is true only in certain situations, and that application where it is not effective is more harmful than the lack of its implementation. This is because ethics is not simply a system of noble theories whose practical effectiveness is nonexistent, but a coherent system as far as considering the context on the basis of the appropriate ethical principle. In society it is difficult to analyze one situation or another from an ethical point of view and to follow general rules that are not applicable in most practical 7 Ibid., p. 180. 8 Martin Cohen, 101 Ethical Dilemmas (London and New York: Routledge, 2007), p. 2. Modern Society and its Ethical Dilemmas 73 situations. What you can see is the ease that people exhibit when passing by opposition from good to bad under the impulse of power. For the first time, Philip Zimbardo's Stanford Experiment9 determined the restriction of the experiments between some ethical limits imposed in an effort to prevent the possibility of abuse that might spring from this feeling of power. In 1971 Zimbardo conducted an experiment in which he randomly chose two groups of student volunteers who would participate in the experiment. The first group consisted only of women and the second group was mixed. Zimbardo describes only the experimental situation encountered in the group of women, because there the abuse of power is identified. Both groups are divided, and in the first part of the group of volunteers, students are depersonalised by replacing their names with numbers and their uniform with common prisoners' clothing, and then being transferred to a special prison. The other half of the group is also depersonalized because their names are replaced with numbers and they receive uniforms, except that theirs are the uniforms of the guards. Th guards took control over the prisoners and the effect of the role exchange made them become during those six days a kind of torturers. During the night shift, they subjected those in the second part of the group to abuses far exceeding the normal requirements of the experiment (e.g. by forcing them to wash the toilets with their hands, using insults, calling them names, etc.). Zimbardo was compromised as experimenter and was forced to discontinue the experiment due to the excesses of his volunteer students in the role of guardians, and the experience itself seems to have led to a change of the principles and rules by which experiments are conducted. The question Zimbardo asked himself is: do good people really exist? His response is as tough as it is realistic, and the retrospective he makes clearly outlines the border between mercy and murder. The conclusion is that the border between the good man and the criminal is much easier to cross than philosophers might imagine, and he makes an overview of events which justify his assumption (prisoners in World War I, World War II camps, prisoners in Siberia, and the genocide in Rwanda and Cambodia). All these examples justify the conclusion that man is prone to evil actions, so that the existence of clear ethical principles is necessarily imposed. Ethics shows that this quantification is often the indicator of the degree of morality of actions and therefore consequentialism would be closer to utilitarianism, that is, to an assessment of the usefulness and consequences upon majority. \"The crowd represents crushing, abolition, removing difference from the Other. Moral responsibility feeds itself from difference. The crowd lives 9 Philip Zimbardo, Efectul lui Lucifer (București : Editura Nemira, 2009). 74 Cornelia Găşpărel in similarity.\"10 Through interpretation and analysis, the human being, whether it is in a therapeutic context, or in a social one, has access to a disclosed reality, imposed or created, that can cause trouble (misfortune), which leads to the following idea: \"the fairness of the human act is judged by it producing the greatest happiness for the greatest number of people.\" 11 Could this be enough? John Broome conducted an analysis of medical situations that reminds us in some degree of the principle of responsibility for the disease, by which the medical services are distributed. Broome's analysis and the graphic below highlight the patient's response to a palliative treatment compared to the reaction to a second type of treatment that is more aggressive. Figure 1. Comparative analysis of welfare between the application of a palliative or an aggressive treatment12 The real situation is that a person who has a form of terminal illness has a choice between a palliative option, in which the pain is reduced and life is prolonged, but prolonged for less time than with an aggressive form of treatment that will cause pain. Broome's conclusion is that the best solution is the palliative but shorter version. Strictly from the medical point of view, the analysis is pertinent, but from a moral point of view we ask ourselves where this kind of analysis might lead? 10 Ibid., p. 143. 11Mihaela Miroiu, Gabriela Blebea Nicolae, Introducere în etica profesională (București: Editura Trei, 2001), p. 32. 12 John Broome, Weighing Lives (Oxford University, 2004), p. 2. Modern Society and its Ethical Dilemmas 75 Society subjects us by its dilemmas to a variety of situations and to solutions that may surprise us as in the solution found in the second situation described by Broome. So, in a situation of choice, as one between a young person and an old one, we would be surprised that the analysis for such a situation is purely pragmatic, which leads us to think that the scale of utilitarianism may have a long-term effect extending to and including a wide range of current issues. Figure 2. Assessment of welfare for young and elderly people13 Broome says the analysis carried out in such a situation refers to the welfare potential posed by the person concerned, in this case the young and elderly. Rather, the concept of welfare has, in this context, a sense of procreation. Hence, a pragmatic criterion is followed, because the young will sooner be helped for future generations to survive and contribute to the welfare of society while the elder, due to his age, does not represent such a potential. This situation of quantifying certain benefits leads our mind to a consumer society where moral principles are secondary. In the scientific context these benefits can lead to and support theories that were before countered by arguments, by which they manage to maintain and produce more or less positive effects. Maybe not in vain, the criticism on the unconscious theory was not assimilated. Beliefs and new behaviors are performed in time and by word. Therefore Richard Rorty thinks that \"the acquisition of new vocabularies of moral reflection\"14 can influence and trigger moral conscience or ethics, and, we believe, that this updated linguistic load that would lead us to our true depth represented by character 13 Ibid., p. 6. 14 Ibid., p. 242. 76 Cornelia Găşpărel and reveals consciousness, memory, and will, understood and analyzed in a context of freedom, is still missing. REINTERPRETING THEORIES OF THE UNCONSCIOUS IN TERMS OF ETHICS– MEMORY, WILL AND FREEDOM With the orthodox psychoanalysis and especially with the theories of the unconscious specifically promoted by Sigmund Freud, other approaches to unconscious (hereditary neurological and philosophical unconscious) have entered into obscurity and the epistemological foundation that we find in the psychological and philosophical approaches show us that arguments that stand behind this unconscious lost some of their value. To analyze the value, potential, and motives of the unconscious is perhaps needed to clear the space for analysis, definition, and interpretation of conscience, in the ethical and social sense, that is, from the philosophical and psychological perspective. The human being lives his immediate present time and also his past, in a community that is reported and subjected to two fundamental laws, the social law of the community and the divine law, the first containing the law with its meanings and legal effects and hence the problem of placing blame easily. As Constantin Noica would say, \"you can function only under a law, and so your deed is guilty as partial and mutilating. You are guilty no matter what you do.\"15 Therefore it is important to see what it is meant by consciousness, especially self-consciousness, which involves and brings with it the Other's awareness. We need to take away the guilt from the human being without sacrificing his accountability in a moral, legal, and social sense. The analysis of human interiority is rather a review and a clarification of frameworks and concepts for ideational and practical development. As we believe that Noica's perspective concerning the moments of realization of consciousness have as models the steps cadence but also the warm's movement, because consciousness is the diverse One-himself, in other words, consciousness is what comes through sensations and perceptions – \"if the course is that of the step, first you have, on the one who moves, the undifferentiated unity of the body, then you have a division that is the step itself, finally you have a unit which recovers, when you withdraw your foot. If the movement is that of a creeping worm, first you have an indefinite chain, then the tightening, the deflection, the bending of the chain, and last its recovery and its moving forward. That is the case of conscience. First you have indeterminacy, that of sensation, then determinations of perception, and then you have a relaxation and an annulment of determinations, in the laws of the intellect. First you have something subjective, indistinctive, then something objective, 15 Constantin Noica, Povestiri despre om (București: Editura Cartea Românească, 1980), p. 187. Modern Society and its Ethical Dilemmas 77 differentiations, and eventually an absolute beyond differentiations. Subjective-objective-absolute, this is our cadence.\"16 That is no more or less than self-consciousness, reason, and spirit, the perception of the individual as Universal. Consciousness contains and brings with it the epistemological foundation that any analysis which has as referential the human interiority contained or not in a social or historical community should start. But this epistemological foundation leads us to the triad of philosophicalhereditary-neurological unconscious proposed by Marcel Gauchet, namely to return to the history of the person, which brings not only the appeal to individual or collective consciousness, but especially reveals all those experiences and feelings that lead us to the fragmented approaches of the theory of the unconscious and of memory, will, and freedom. We can say in this context of analysis, that we are interested in the human interiority and in the way it was analyzed so far from this perspective of consciousness, of the triad memory-willfreedom, because here we can reach a deeper understanding of the triad memory-childhood-sexuality – the one that Gauchet proposes to argue the importance and the role of the cerebral unconscious in scientific approaches. This direction toward which Gauchet leads us is significant, because on the basis of these theories of the unconscious and consciousness, ethical, psychological, and legal theories and interpretations were constructed, all of them aiming largely at human empowerment and also at their inclusion in a socio-historical context. In psychological terms the triad memory-liberty-will loses part of the strength and value we find in the philosophical approaches and interpretations, which value man and give responsibility to the social and historical framework. If we are to consider only the question of freedom, whose psychological reference could be identified in concepts such as independence, self-esteem, or mental health, we find that we can actually, if desired, refer to the concept of freedom as we find it in Arthur Schopenhauer, namely: physical freedom, intellectual freedom, and moral freedom. We believe that at this stage of analysis the removal of the epistemological foundation that philosophy as a science and ethics as logical system of classification and development of humanity gave it, through what we call the transition from the individual to the act, is under the sign of uncertainty in terms of knowledge, understanding, and interpretation. Human interiority brings with it a whole hereditary, social, and psychological history that would constitute what Freud called the unconscious. This simplistic reduction of the area of conscious acts to what unconscious acts would imply and that would strictly represent the person's history, clearly shows a separation from the scientific philosophical framework that would have given a full and comprehensive knowledge of the immediacy and sensitivity in terms of sensation, perception, cognition, 16 Ibid., p. 31. 78 Cornelia Găşpărel and affectivity that is found in the triad of memory-childhood-sexuality. Therefore, we adhere in this regard to the reference to the moral foundations of psychology, proposed by Otto Weininger, who takes into consideration precisely this aspect of the importance of memory on moral and immoral acts, that consciously or unconsciously manifests through states of consciousness. He believes that \"although memory is not a logical and ethical act, it is, however, a logical and ethical phenomena. Memory is also moral, because it allows repentance by itself. Forgetting everything is in itself immoral. Therefore piety is also a moral precept.\"17 Simplifying the role and the importance of memory in terms of selectivity justifies the theory of unconscious but not the one of conscience. \"But what a man never forgets and what he cannot store best enables the characterization of his identity, of his character,\"18 Weininger believes, which is not far from Noica's perspective, who considers that \"the man who cannot forget cannot be lucid ever again.\" The drama of the contemporary man seems to be no other than this: he cannot forget.\"19 In this view of the memory, consciousness regains its primary position, the original one, that of being moral. This ethical dimension of consciousness brings man into the light of his given nature and subtly makes him responsible, without social and historical but rather inherited constraints. And from here we would say that we could also look toward the universal, which first would be the responsibility of the other, in the sense of society, system, or person, to recover the right to memory, freedom, and individual will, which would include the right to self-defense. For memory, understood in a broad sense, aims not only the strict informational aspects, but an entire personal and social history, which lies in the genetic and emotional code and to which we differently have access, because of these differences of self-consciousness. It is necessary therefore to see what would happen to man without memory, be it strictly informational. The human genetic code is, if you want, his inherited memory, without which he could not relate to others because through it, the genetic code, the hereditary dowry, one can observe the difference and the similarity; and the difference could be in the context of ethical review, what Noica called moral genius, which is more than the consciousness of fulfilled duty. Repositioning and analysing the theories concerning the unconscious in terms of innovations in science (genetics), of re-ordering the health insurance systems, and of revising the legal codes brings with it a recontextualization of certain moral models, ethical principles that will lead to 17 Otto Weininger, Sex și caracter (București: Editura Anastasia, 2002), p. 251. 18 Ibid., p. 212. 19 Constantin Noica, Mathesis sau bucuriile simple (Bucureşti: Editura Humanitas, 1992), p. 37. Modern Society and its Ethical Dilemmas 79 approaching the human being from particular to general , because from the particular cases generality eventually forms, as in The Universal. Through memory man regains his right to self defense, looking back into the past with a degree of freedom and will he possesses in a society in which constraints are justified or not. \"When the moralist overlooks the relationship of an act to a certain state of mind as its cause, and its connection through that common cause with large classes and groups of actions apparently very little resembling itself, his estimation even of the consequences of the very act itself, is rendered imperfect.\"20 In other words, the interpretations that take into consideration the presence of a wellness state, having as landmark the number and less the context (or the means of obtaining it), lose sight of the ethical analysis component. Self-knowledge enhances knowledge of others, which may lead to accountability and morality. If we accept this view, then this implies that we should also subscribe to Richard Rorty's view that \"far from what we have in common with other members of our species, self-knowledge is precisely what distinguishes us from them: our random idiosyncrasies, \"irrational\" components of our egos, the ones that divide us into incompatible sets of beliefs and desires.\"21 Selfknowledge can lead to personal autonomy in the social context. Selfknowledge does not exclude socialization, but rather it triggers and may lead to moral behavior causing suffering, consciousness, and difference. What could be more daring, more recent than the courage to announce to physicists that the inert will be explained by the vivid; to biologists that life can only be understood by thinking; to philosophers that generalities are not philosophical; to teachers that they need to learn about the whole before talking about elements; to students that they should start with perfection; and to humans – more torn than ever by hatred and selfishness – that their \"natural impulse is their generosity.\" 22 Romanian Academy Iaşi, Romania gasparelc@yahoo.com 20 John Stuart Mill, \"Remarks on Bentham's Philosophy,\" in The Collected Works, ed. J.M. Robson, Volume 10 (London and New York: Routledge, 1974), p. 8. 21 Richard Rorty, Pragmatism şi filosfie post-nietzscheană (Bucureşti: Editura Univers, 2000), p. 233. 22 Henri Bergson, Introducere în metafizică (Iași: Editura Institutului European, 1993), p. 220.\n\nCHAPTER VI ASPIRATIONS AND ANTICIPATIONS OF UNIVERSALISM: THE GLOBAL VILLAGE IN ANCIENT ROME1 IULIAN-GABRIEL HRUŞCĂ Abstract: Globalization is not only a modern phenomenon. The modern notion of global village is tributary to the Roman tradition. The main differences between antiquity and modernism are the technological progress, the far more sophisticated means of communication today, and the larger scale at which the contemporary process of globalization takes place. Ancient Greece anticipated some characteristics of any process of globalization, but from the point of view of globalization, the Latin Miracle is far and away more significant than the Greek Miracle. The Roman Empire was the first significant global village and the ideal of universalism derives from the concept of humanitas Romana. Keywords: globalization, Roman globalization, ancient social processes. In our study we want to emphasize that globalization is not only a modern phenomenon, because similar elements of the actual process of globalization could be found also in the past, in the case of ancient Rome, for example. At the same time, we wish to create the opportunity to reflect on some aspects of Roman globalization, which was a model, in some respects, for the way in which the modern world acts today in global circumstances. Our study is intended to be also a mirror of some ancient manifestations of the globalization process that were, sometimes, managed in a more sophisticated manner by the Romans and could offer us new subtleties of behavior. The concept of globalization/global village2 existed also in antiquity, having been formulated by Greek philosophers in theory and by Greek politicians in practice. However, the Romans succeeded in finding a 1 Acknowledgement: This paper was written within The Knowledge Based Society Project supported by the Sectorial Operational Program Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), financed by the European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract number POSDRU/89/1.5/S/56815. 2 I am especially indebted to Richard A. Bauman, The Global Village in Ancient Rome and in Modern Times, in Menschenrechte und europäische Identität. Die antiken Grundlagen, by Klaus M. Girardet and Ulrich Nortmann, (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 2005), pp. 38-48. 82 Iulian-Gabriel Hruşcă practical solution for the ideas of universality only theoretically propagated in the spheres of the Hellenistic civilization. Universal Rome was both a concept and a practical reality.3 The modern notion of global village is tributary to the Roman tradition. The main differences between antiquity and modernism are technological progress, the far more sophisticated means of communication nowadays, and the bigger scale at which the contemporary process of globalization takes place. However, today the global village is considered a unique manifestation of modernity. Especially from the twentieth century till the present, the modern human being has considered himself the inventor of globalization as of many other things, ignoring that the first true process of globalization took place at a smaller scale in the entire Mediterranean world and even on further lands, and had an impact on all the people from this large geographical space. Global village is a term that is associated with Marshall McLuhan, who made famous the term especially in the books The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man (1962) and Understanding Media (1964). McLuhan described how the globe has been reduced to the manifestations of a village by electric technology and the very fast flow of information. Through the term global village, McLuhan understood a world \"in which the electronic media have radically reduced the distance and isolation of people from each other, restoring to humans some of their original sense of being part of a village or tribe\"4. Today, the term global village is commonly used to describe the effects of telecommunications at the society level; it is an expression that identifies itself with the Internet and World Wide Web, and this term also brings us to the idea of a vast and unified global community. McLuhan's term – used mainly by Bauman5 – seems to have been ignored by other specialists who rather preferred the word globalization6 or even the word globalution.7 However, the specialists and writers8 who used 3 Ibid., p. 38. 4See Marshall McLuhan & Bruce R. Powers, The Global Village: Transformations in World Life and Media in the Twenty-first Century (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989). 5 Richard A. Bauman, op. cit., supra note 2, pp. 38-48. 6See for example Tony Ballantyne, Globalization in World History (London: Pimlico, 2002) and Paul Dobrescu, Viclenia globalizării. Asaltul asupra puterii americane [Cunning of Globalization. The Assault on American Power] (Iași: The European Institute, 2010). 7 See Thomas Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree (London: Harper Collins, 1999). 8 This syntagm refers to personalities such as Marshall McLuhan, Thomas Friedman, Paul Dobrescu, Paul M. Kennedy, Francis Fukuyama, Samuel P. Huntington. Aspirations and Anticipations of Universalism 83 the term in one form or another, theorizing about it, forget that the modern notion of global village is tributary to classical antiquity. If in modern times the notion of global village/globalization was put into a theoretical shape by theorists and thinkers9, Bauman noticed that the same notion – which in extension presumes universalism and the concept of humanitas10 – took, in some respects, a practical form in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted by the United Nations in 1948.11 In the introduction, it is written that \"the inherent dignity and ... equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family [are] the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.\" This is not much more than a reassertion of the doctrine of universalism that was brought to Rome by Greeks as Crates, Polybius, Panaetius or his disciple, Hecato of Rhodes, who, in their turns, were propagating the sociological and cosmopolitan conception of Cleanthes, Chrysippus, or Zenon of Tarsus. After this Hellenistic contribution to the development of Roman mentality, Rome itself perpetuated these ideas and found a practical application for them, giving birth to the concept of humanitas Romana, becoming a civitas of the entire world and rethinking Greece. From that point, humanitas was, for over two thousand years, the foundation of culture and knowledge. The Declaration that is so similar with the postulations of ancient universalism is grouped by Bauman in the following categories of rights: 1. The right to life, liberty, security of person, equality before the law, fair trial, asylum, and freedom from torture and inhuman punishment; 2. The right to privacy, reputation, opinions, religion, mobility, nationality; 3. The right to marry, own property, take part in government, choose one's occupation, receive an education.12 Some of these rights have Roman correspondents. The first group of rights, which declares the struggle against acts of brutality on human beings is the central problem of human rights and concerns both the modern scene and the ancient scene. Despite the negative opinions circulating about the Romans and their acts of violence, ancient Rome was not, as often as many believe, a generator of brutal acts on others. In fact, the Roman state emerged from a conflict zone where no one was angel and in a period of time when the struggle of a community for survival was severe. Roman imperialism – and in Eugen Cizek's opinion, this term is not appropriate to 9 Ibid. 10 See I. Heinemann, Humanitas, RE Supp. 5 (1931), pp. 282-310. 11 Richard A. Bauman, op. cit., supra footnote 2, p. 39. 12 See Richard A. Bauman, Human Rights in Ancient Rome (London: Routledge, 2000), pp. 2-3. 84 Iulian-Gabriel Hruşcă define the massive and rapid Roman expansion13 – was, at least in the beginning, based on defensive principles.14 And, when Rome was powerful and vast enough, the Romans provided the Mediterranean populations with a political unity which – as the Stoic philosophers predicted – generated Roman universalism and a model of international order called Pax Romana. Having the possibility to use force on others, Rome only occasionally abused its power. We consider that there are empires that spread culture, welfare, and a sort of universal unity among governed, and others that remained in history only as conquerors and profiteers. Rome was an empire that can be included in the first category as a state that benefited from their subjects, but also dealt with the welfare of the conquered populations and was a civilizing factor in a Europe too often brutal and savage. At the same time, Rome managed to create a space where peace ruled for a very long period during the Pax Romana, according to Polybius' ideal of a state where conflicts remain a manifestation of the past.15 How many other empires can boast such a performance? For a better understanding of the anticipation of globalization/global village in ancient Rome, we should also refer to some aspects prior to the Roman process of globalization. Ancient Greece anticipated some characteristics of the process of globalization. Greek thinkers elaborated on the principles of philanthropia,16 a term that had the meaning of \"goodwill toward all men,\" and promoted the idea of a moral obligation owed by every human being to every other human person. The concept of universal unity of the human race, of universalism/cosmopolitanism, which is seen as a derivative of philanthropia, was easy to draw out from such ideas. However, such concepts remained in ancient Greece at a declarative level, because the Greeks were also very elitist and independent persons, dividing humanity into Hellenes and Barbarians. The dissociation between the ones who are Greek and the ones who are not was even more emphasized when it was about the practical application of the principles of philanthropia. Those who were not Greek were always considered inferior and the Greeks never really assimilated another culture or another population in a manner similar to the Romans. In fact, the Greeks never achieved in practice a universal unity of all human beings. The continuous wars between the different poleis led to the defeat of Greece by Macedonia, then by Rome and, in the end, by the Ottoman Empire. This gradual transition from one conqueror to another is somehow reflected in the degradation of the heroic 13 Eugen Cizek, Istoria Romei [The History of Rome] (București: Paideia, 2002), p. 106. 14 Specialists as Theodor Mommsen, E. Badian, Paul Veyne, or M. Holleaux sustained such a point of view. Others, such as Montesquieu, Bossuet, and W. V. Harris, declared that Roman imperialism was voluntary. 15 Gerardo Zampaglione, The Idea of Peace in Antiquity (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1973), p. 142. 16 Richard A. Bauman, op. cit., supra footnote 12, pp. 10-19. Aspirations and Anticipations of Universalism 85 Greek to the stage of Graecus vir, then of Graeculus and, in the end, of a sort of Balkan Graeculus. The Greeks used the term of bárbaros (in Latin barbarus) in a way that indicated a contemptuous attitude. In the beginning, the Greeks extended the term of bárbaros even to Romans, which caused the anger of Cato the Elder (Marcus Porcius Cato Maior – 234 BC-149 BC) when they said \"nos dictitant barbaros [esse]\"17. After the spiritual unity between the Greeks and the Romans became more obvious, the Greeks finally transformed the statement \"pas me héllen bárbaros estí\"/ \"the one who is not Greek is a Barbarian\" into the statement \"pas me héllen kaì romaíos bárbaros estí\"/ \"the one who is not Greek or Roman is a Barbarian.\" Unlike the Greeks, the Romans tried to integrate others, the Barbarians, into their community. The difference between the Greeks' attitude of rejection and the Romans' integration approach was clearly emphasized by Emperor Claudius and by Tacitus (An., 11, 24, 2-5). Under the Empire, the Romans showed curiosity and interest impregnated by the taste of exotic for the other, for the Barbarian. 18 In Ancient Greece, however, the first move toward a sort of cosmopolitanism was the Athenian empire of the fifth century BC. The second move toward partial universalism was made in Central Greece by the Achaean Confederacy. Finally, the empire of Alexander the Great introduced some idea of universalism when it was about the Persians, but this gentle treatment was based rather on the laws of conquest than on ius gentium,19 as it will be known to the Romans. However, these forms of empires were no more than a prelude to Rome's achievements concerning universalism. 20 From the point of view of globalization, the Latin Miracle is far more significant than the Greek Miracle: \"Rome anticipated the modern idea of creating a world environment in which solutions become possible. The Roman Empire was the first significant global village. It was the unique place to give effect to the ideal of universalism.\"21 The idea of Rome's universalism, planted in Italian soil by Greek thinkers and augmented by the concept of humanitas Romana, crossed over time from the period of the Scipionic Circle to the end of empire and even more. During Trajan, for example, Rome was a communis patria of a great part of Europe and Asia and included the entire Mediterranean world. The multicultural aspect of the Roman state is described very eloquently by Publius Aelius Aristides, a Greek-speaking Roman. In the year 155, he praises the Emperor Antoninus in a panegyric. The conditions 17 Pliny the Elder (Natural History XXIX,14) has this passage from Cato: \"Nos quoque dictitant barbaros.\" 18 See Eugen Cizek, [The History of Rome] (București: Paideia, 2002), p. 13. 19 Rights common to all men. 20 Richard Bauman, op. cit., supra footnote 2, p. 41. 21 Richard Bauman, op. cit., supra footnote 12, p. 6. 86 Iulian-Gabriel Hruşcă were totally opposed to the ones in which Ovid expressed his laudatio to Augustus in Tomis, almost at the end of the world; now Aelius Aristides glorifies Pax Romana and the emperor in the most wonderful city of the time: Rome. However, Aelius Aristides praises not only the Emperor Antoninus, but also the entire Roman elite and administration that govern the vast space of the Roman Empire in the spirit of universalism. He emphasizes that the Roman citizenship is not only referring to the people living in a city but to a general race, one that balanced all the rest through culture and behavior. This state is universal, because the ones who are not Romans are treated not as foreigners, but as their own people by the magistrates. Even the wars are now a manifestation of the past (Panegyric to Rome, 59-60, 63-71, 102).22 Rome managed to put in practice the theoretical ideas promoted by the Greeks and even more. The Romans shaped a concept in their particular manner and applied the principles of humanitas in the space they created and governed, influencing the way in which universalism functioned. Humanitas Romana was not the copied Roman equivalent of the Greek philanthropia or paideia, but a notion conceived in a Roman manner. The Romans have dissociated in the semantic area of humanitas a psycho-moral hemisphere, based on kindness, goodness, and mercy, but also a cultural and philosophical hemisphere, based on training, education, and culture. The concept was theorized by the treaties of Cicero and Seneca, was reflected in literature by the works of Terentius, Virgil, or Ovid, and had a practical side conferred by law and processes. Later, the concept also influenced the development of humanism in literature. Humanitas Romana was based on a multitude of values that were part of the conduct code of a Roman citizen: mores, dignitas, gravitas, integritas, clementia, aequitas, lenitas, mansuetudo, moderatio, indulgentia, iustitia, pietas, fides. This made the universalism of Rome to be unique and different from the cosmopolitanism of the Greeks that, as said before, never took a serious and strong shape. Bauman noticed some characteristics of Universal Rome that put it in advantage over any other previous versions of universalism. The most important, in our opinion, are the following three characteristics: 1. The creation of an imperial, multicultural citizenship that worked together with the local citizenship. Patriotism is encouraged in the sense of belonging to an exclusive club. 2. The powerful notion of permanence and universality. 3. The creation of a kind of ancient multinational corporations that stand outside the reach of national governments.23 22 See also Laurent Pernot, Aelius Aristides and Rome, in Aelius Aristides between Greece, Rome and the Gods, edited by W. V. Harris and Brooke Holmes (Leiden: Brill, 2009), pp. 173-202. 23 Richard A. Bauman, op. cit., supra footnote 2, pp. 42-43. Aspirations and Anticipations of Universalism 87 Although the modern notion is different from what natio was in the eyes of the Romans, it seems that, in some respects, there is an interesting equation between the term of natio, Roman citizenship, and the actual perception of nation. The feeling of belonging to an exclusive club could be associated with the feeling of an immigrant that in a new country wants to rally to the same symbols as the others and wants to be a member of the new community. The people from the entire space ruled by Romans had the chance to rally to the same symbols, myths, welfare, and way of life. In addition, they had the chance to come in the new club with their religions and myths, a situation that is very similar with the actual one. Of course, there are also some negative features of Ancient Rome, such as genocide and slavery. But despite these negative sides of the Roman rule, Rome is famous even today for its multicultural side. In a way, for many moderns, even the process of Romanization is associated first with the oppression and only secondly with a process of civilization, omitting the universal, cosmopolitan, and multicultural aspects of the phenomenon, all of these being connected with humanitas Romana and deriving from it. We do not want to say that the Romans were a blessing to a conquered people, but for the next generations, the Roman rule surely had benefits, as well. Now it is appropriate to tackle the issue of civitas and anticivitas.24 Civitas is significant for the period of Republican Rome. Civitas indicated for a Roman that he is part of the city-state, the country, and the common family of all citizens. Civitas was Rome and its colonies, the new cities of Rome from Italy and from provinces. Even the military camps, castra, represented fragments of civitas. During the Roman Empire civitas ceased to function as a mental structure, in the opinion of Claude Nicolet. Imperium had a geographical and territorial connotation in that period. Even in the first century BC, we can notice a new sort of Latin, new techniques of communication, that are qualified by Nicolet as aspects of anticivitas. The citizens, in his opinion, lost the feeling of solidarity with the city-state and they felt like part of a population located on a vast territory, respectively, anticivitas. Indeed, they felt like citizens of a very large state, but this aspect is not opposed to civitas, we can say, but is a continuation. All the inhabitants of the Empire were still glorifying Rome, caput-imperii. The mental structure indeed changed, but as a following consequence of an extended civitas, in this case the proper term being in our opinion transcivitas; that better summarizes the multicultural aspect of the Roman Empire and the idea of Roman universalism. Roman civilization did not disappear without leaving significant traces. The idea of Eternal and Universal Rome survived many 24 See Claude Nicolet, The World of the Citizen in Republican Rome (Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1980) and Eugen Cizek, Istoria Romei, op. cit., supra footnote 18, 19-21. 88 Iulian-Gabriel Hruşcă centuries after the collapse of the Western Empire. Indeed, it was no longer a geographical location, but a perpetual transcivitas. In general, we are prone to label things. The specialists are no exception to the rule. Ancient Rome was labeled with the term of imperialism or with the term of universalism, among many others. We believe that we approach quite enough ancient realities if we express a preference for the universalism label. Universal Rome expresses a viable idea. Romanian Academy Iaşi, Romania yulyushr@yahoo.com CHAPTER VII WAS THE MODERN COSMOPOLIS TRANSFORMED INTO A POST-MODERN GLOBAL VILLAGE? CONSTANTIN STOENESCU Abstract: I argue in this paper that the shift from Modernity to postModernity was accompanied by a deep change of some presuppositions shared by all the people who belong to this tradition. Following Stephen Toulmin's idea about the age of modernity from his book Cosmopolis, The Hidden Agenda of Modernity, I try to demonstrate that post-Modernity replaces the so-called Project of Cosmopolis with that of a global village. In other words, there is a difference between what we want to build and what we have built in fact. The main reason for this process is the invasion of a new kind of subjectivity in all areas of social life. Keywords: modernity, post-modernity, cosmopolis, social life, change. PROLOGUE: POST-MODERNITY AND POST-MODERNISM, TWO IN ONE When we think about the future, we do it within a framework of expectations. Our beliefs and foresights are shaped by the limits of the present, because we want to do and we want to decide to do only desirable things. In this sense our capacity to forecast is limited and any imaginable future will look like the present. Therefore, I don't want to make a prediction here about the course of events in the future, but only to describe a trend and to explain on this basis what happened and, insofar as the future looks like the past, to announce a possible future. Anyway, although we take the past as an ally, the idea about the future must be viewed as a product of speculative imagination, because, as we already know from Hume, we don't have any reliable epistemological reason to think that things will be as they were in the past. The question from the title of this study is put forward as a weak commitment for an answer. As we know, a questions contains within itself a selected answer; it is a constraint or a framework for uncertain possibilities. The project of Modernity was equated by Toulmin to the project of a Cosmopolis: starting with the seventeenth century, \"Humanity seemed to have set aside all doubts and ambiguities about its capacity to achieve its goals here on Earth, and in historical time, rather than deferring human fulfillment from an Afterlife in Eternity – that was what had made the project of Modernity rational – and this optimism led to major advances 90 Constantin Stoenescu not just in natural science but in moral, political, and social thought...\" 1 If the Cosmopolis was a philosophical or an ideological construct of Modernity and we accept this idea as an unproblematic statement, then my main aim here is to describe this state of fact and to offer an approach to the so-called state of arts in the present, in times of a new cultural age, postmodernity. And the new question is if the Cosmopolis is still available or if it was demolished by the architects of post-modernity. I prefer to use the expression post-modernity as a name for a process with at least two phases, modernity and post-modernity, and to let slide the expression postmodernism. The two, post-modernity and post-modernism, overlap and have in common a hard core, but differ as types of succession: post – modernity is a new form of modernity, postmodernism is another age, a case of secession, even a clash with modernity, not just a simple succession. Postmodernity is a new phase of modernity in the same tradition or an effect of modernity, post-modernism is the destruction of modernity or of the so-called weak modernity, if we may use Vattimo's idea about weak thought and his nihilistic reading of history.2 What relation is there, then, between the modern Cosmopolis and the global village? First of all, I think that globalization is the end of modernity, and only of modernity, not of history, as Fukuyama stated.3 This means that the old Kantian ideal about a common peaceful world was fulfilled in this manner, as a global world, even if somebody may not like this or may not recognize in it a Kantian ideal. Kant wanted to change the world through the forces of peace, rationality, and law, first of all. This historical project was the basis of modern society with the national state as a cell of global order. But the technological evolution and the market economy changed society, and the national state became something old-fashioned. The new aim is a global order based on transnational processes and the new brave world looks like a village, like a global village in which every person can know almost everything, if she or he wants, about everybody. We, the citizens of the global village, have new values in common, and try to live together, face to face, connected to mass-media, ready to take a job with the benefits of our global community. Is this a real picture or just another ideological movement? 1 Stephen Toulmin, Cosmopolis, The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), p. IX. 2 See Gianni Vattimo, The End of Modernity – Nihilism and Hermeneutics in the Post-Modern Culture, translated by John P. Snyder (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991), for this nihilistic understanding of our history. 3 See Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (Illinois: Free Press, 1992). From Modern Cosmopolis into a Post-Modern Global Village 91 SECESSION AND SUCCESSION: A TERMINOLOGICAL DEBATE OR A REAL CHANGE IN THE WORLD? The debate about the changing world began in architecture after the First World War, regarding the new style proposed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and then by some of his contemporaries, among them Walter Gropius and Le Corbusier. Their minimal buildings, made from steel and glass, guided by the principle that less means more, became a new pattern, the socalled skin and bones design, for the architectural development of cities/towns and for urban planning. This anonymous simplicity has as a result a lack of specificity and a high similarity between public buildings, especially those for offices. This style was named Modern, because it was conceived as a style of Modern times, in opposition with the Classical style of Antiquity and the Gothic style of the Medieval Age. After 1970, a new generation of architects and designers appeared, with Robert Venturi as a leader. They tried to give the imagination back to architecture, especially the historical references and decorative elements. Their criticism against modernity wasn't in fact a critique of modernity as a whole, but just this particular movement in architecture initialized by Mies and named Modernism. Therefore, post-modernism in its first phase is a particular movement and has as its aim only to stop and to surpass or overcome modernism in architecture. It wasn't its aim to finish with modernity or to replace modernity with something like postmodernity. On the other hand, understood as a critique of modernity, postmodernism undermines the authority of modern tradition and that of modern institutions. First of all, the idea of universality is under attack because the new preferred approaches are deconstruction and the analysis of little fragments. As a cultural movement, postmodernism is opposite to modernity. In literature, post-modernism lead in the end to the break with realism and chose to explore and to enter the inner space of conscience or the virtual space of dreams. Writers like Joyce and Fowels ceased to describe the facts objectively and used the subtle capacities of language to express thoughts, actions, and attitudes. The term post-modernism was used by Jean Francois Lyotard in the year 1979 in his book La condition post-moderne. Is post-modernism something new in philosophy, entirely different from modernity? Using the Wittgesteinian model of language games, Lyotard has tried to describe the new rules of the postmodern age. In the Stanford Encyclopedia postmodernism is defined as a set of critical practices employing concepts such as difference, repetition, the trace, the simulacrum, and hyperreality in order to destabilize concepts such as presence, identity, historical progress, epistemic reality, and the univocity of meaning. Did the postmodernists use a new list of speech acts? Not even if we take into account the style of Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. The critique of philosophical systems built after a Hegelian pattern is one of the common jobs of postmodern philosophers. 92 Constantin Stoenescu At the same time, any subjective approach, like that used by Nietzsche in his theory of values, is considered at least a sign of post-modernity. Some philosophers think that there is a secession war between modernity and post – modernity, a violent separation and a clash between tradition and the new age of post – modernism. Two of them are E. M. Cioran and Michel Henry. Both of them have described contemporary times as an age of barbarians. Cioran wrote in terms of a deep gap between us and modern tradition: \"We no longer have a past, or rather, there is nothing left of the past which is our own, no longer a chosen country, no longer salvation, and no refuge in yore. Our prospects? Impossible to distinguish them, we are barbarians without a future.\" 4 Henry5 has described the secession like a fight between good and evil. The ideal aims of modernity, the universal and objective science, and the quest for truth led to the elimination of subjectivity and sensibility from culture and society. Although science isn't bad in itself, it became a social and cultural monster because it promoted a way of life without humanism, without the values of subjectivity, and, therefore, without real life, namely, without art, religion, and ethic. In fact, science and technology have no ethic because they are objective. Therefore, as a reaction against bad objectivity, some people think that the first move on the way to post-modernism belongs to Kant and is related to his \"Copernican Revolution:\" subjectivity was rediscovered, the knowing subject put in the spotlight, and the object dependent on the subject. Objectivity becomes, in Kantian terms, objectivity only in a weak sense, namely, transcendental subjectivity. Remembering Vatimo's idea about weak thought, we could summarize that all the modern strong claims for objectivity and universalism were put into question by post-modernism. Briefly speaking, the term \"modern\" is asymmetrical. After Latour, it is doubly asymmetrical because \"it designates a break in the regular passage of time, and it designates a combat in which there are victors and vanquished.\"6 I think we can also apply this idea to the word \"postmodernism.\" This means that we could speak about a translation and purification in the passage from modernity to post-modernism. But this isn't the place for such a discussion about humans, things, and hybrids. Anyway, according to Latour, modernity is a double process, a translation on one hand, and a purification on the other. By translation we create new types of beings; by purification we create two distinct ontological zones: nature and culture. 4 Emil M. Cioran, The Temptation to Exist ), transl. by Richard Howard (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), p. 89. 5 See Michel Henry, La Barbarie (Paris: Grasset, 1987). 6 Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern, translated by Catherine Porter (Cambridge Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1993), p.10. From Modern Cosmopolis into a Post-Modern Global Village 93 THE MODERN COSMOPOLIS The general framework of understanding is given by the idea that right from the beginning, the struggle for social and political stability interacts with the quest for scientific and intellectual certainty and stability in the modern Cosmopolis.7 But, first of all, the modern Cosmopolis was a social project. The idea of a change in modern tradition, especially in society, politics, and economy was taken into account by Stephen Toulmin in his book, Cosmopolis, The Hidden Agenda of Modernity. His thesis is that at the beginning of modernity, in Descartes's times, the issues of certainty, rational consensus, and necessity weren't just some challenges for philosophy, but they were also responses to practical and historical challenges, primarily the need for a new social and political order after the Thirty Years War. The general crises (economic and social, intellectual and spiritual) in the early seventeenth century broke the public confidence in the older consensus and the Age of Modernity was in fact an effect of several different attempts to build a new one. In the year 1965 Peter Drucker published the book Landmarks for Tomorrow, in which he expressed the belief that we had to differentiate between the sovereign national state in the age of modernity, understood as a political and economic unity formed in the seventeenth century, and the new type of transnational institutions who serve transnational aims. The loyalty for the national state was replaced with transnational interests. The national language as a sign of identity sometimes became an obstacle. This social project has some deep philosophical roots. The Cartesian program leads philosophy into a dead end. In a Cartesian world, which first of all has its own intellectual goals, making clear our ideas and gaining certainty step by step by rational proof, rhetoric was subordinated to formal logic: \"the validity and truth of rational arguments is independent of who presents them, to whom or in what context – such rhetorical questions can contribute nothing to the impartial establishment of human knowledge. For the first time since Aristotle, logical analysis was separated from, and elevated above, the study of rhetoric, discourse, and argumentation.\"8 The basic Cartesian distinction was the Mind-Body dichotomy, and its result was the distinction between rational freedom and causal necessity, between the world of human experience and the world of natural phenomena. An interesting topic related to these changes in the world is the link between science and modernity. Was science the most fruitful creation of 7 Stephen Toulmin, Cosmopolis, The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), p. 92. 8 Ibid., p. 75. Similar ideas, as Toulmin himself has mentioned, may be found in Dewey (1930), and Rorty (1979). Anyway, the question, \"Why did educated people find the quest for certainty so attractive?\" becomes in the end a Cartesian rhetorical statement. 94 Constantin Stoenescu modernity? What could we say about the reciprocal relations between science, technological development, and industrial revolution as a whole? Most of the thinkers of those times thought that the development of science was the sign of the new age of modernity. Few of them, like William Blake and Friedrich Schiller, cautioned about the \"inhuman\" nature of Newtonian science. Regarding educational institutions it is important to mention that the culture of modern Cosmopolis was socially divided in two parts or two traditions. Therefore, the university training given to higher civil servants or to the administrative group had as background literature Latin language and philosophy, while the engineers were trained on the exact sciences.9 The Cartesian dichotomy interacted with the need for absolute claims. The modern Cosmopolis was thereby built on the basis of some such claims: the new European system of states was built on the absolute claims to nationhood; the new political balance of power was built on the claims to stability; the new system of social relations within each nation was built on the basis of a new horizontal social class structure; the new science was built on the absolute claims to certainty. And all these steps were the result of a rational conduct to the aim of objectivity. A NEW SUBJECTIVITY The relationship between modernity and rationality seems to be without any doubt the hard core of any approach. But this new order of modern Cosmopolis based on rational control over nature and society, rules and hierarchy, had some unexpected consequences at the levels of social structure and personal subjectivity. First of all, it is impossible to rationalize and control everything. For example, in modern society some groups cannot be controlled and administrated. The persons belonging to these groups are perceived as strangers. Bauman understands the stranger as a person who is unfamiliar and, because of this, he is seen as a threat. At the same time, another source of uncertainty is globalization, because we are not able to direct events while our affairs take place in a global market on a global scale.10 Secondly, our society translated from a society of producers to a society of consumers. 9 See C.P. Snow, The Two Cultures (New York: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998). 10 See Zigmunt Bauman, Modernity and Ambivalence (New York: Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1991). From Modern Cosmopolis into a Post-Modern Global Village 95 This shift from modernity to post-modernity ensures more freedom for the individuals, but as consumers, not as citizens. They have the freedom to consume and to enjoy their lives. Thirdly, as I have mentioned above, the social quest for certainty transformed scientific knowledge into a pattern for all the other intellectual activities. The universal and objective truth became the main goal of science and this process lead to a new type of subjectivity, which we will call subjectivity without sensibility. According to Henry, in our barbarian times, science tends to exclude or to minimize art, religion, and ethics. Therefore, the modern Cosmopolis was built on the values of tolerance, reciprocity, and trust in a world of certainty and stability. But how do we react against the different threats, for example, when we meet a stranger or when we are the strangers? Individuals try to invent or to discover new ways of life and new organizational frameworks in order to reduce uncertainty and insecurity. In fact, we passed, in Bauman's terms, from a solid modernity to a liquid modernity.11 Social forms of life and institutions don't have enough time to solidify and individuals need to switch from one choice to another. The result of this social metamorphosis is described by Bauman: \"Insecurity affects us all, immersed as we all are in a fluid and unpredictable world of deregulation, flexibility, competitiveness, and endemic uncertainty, but each one of us suffers anxiety on our own, as a private problem, an outcome of personal failings and a challenge to our savoir faire and agility. We are called, as Ulrich Beck has acidly observed, to seek biographical solutions to more systematic contradictions: we look for individual salvation from shared troubles.\"12 On the other hand, as Antonio Gramsci has observed in a brilliant remark, \"the crisis consists precisely in the fact that the old is dying and the new cannot be born; in this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appear.\"13 There are many levels of this crisis, but the most important is that of Western culture as a totality. This interregnum, when modernity collapsed and post-modernity was the newcomer still unborn, was perceived and described by philosophers as a cultural crisis. For example, Edmund Husserl, in his Vienna Lecture which was held in May 1935, known under the title, \"The Crisis of European Humanity and Philosophy,\" wrote about the cultural roots of the European crisis in terms of the need for a humanistic reform after the fail of modern rationalistic culture: \"The European nations are sick: Europe itself, it is said, is in crisis. We are by no means lacking something like nature doctors. Indeed, we are 11 See Zigmunt Bauman, Liquid Modernity (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000). 12 Zigmunt Baumann, Seeking Safety in an Insecure World (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2001), p. 144. 13 Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, edited and translated by Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith (New York: International Publishers, 1971), p. 276. 96 Constantin Stoenescu practically inundated by a flood of naïve and excessive suggestions for reform. But why do the so richly developed humanistic disciplines fail to perform the service here that is so admirably performed by the natural sciences in their sphere?\"14 For Husserl, the new cultural movement must be a reiteration of the European spiritual shape under the supervision of Humanities, because, without any doubt, \"our surrounding world is a spiritual structure in us and in our historical life.\"15 We could also mention the approach proposed by Oswald Spengler in his controversial book The Decline of the West.16 Although I do not entirely share the content of Spengler's thesis, I think that post-modern subjectivity is due to a spiritual crisis and that its roots are in the quest for objectivity and certainty. Among other things, the cynical nature of modern civilization gave rise to a new attitude toward the uses of technologies. MASS MEDIA AND THE NEW NEIGHBORHOOD Lyotard noted in his book about the postmodern condition that the computer and new technologies have transformed knowledge into information. This means that knowledge has been reduced to its propositional dimension, and more specifically, to semantic information. Knowledge is seen as a final product split from the process by which the knowing subject obtained it. We can manage information as a useful thing with a market value, but all these technologies and commercial operations have no connection with the knower's feelings. As a result, we can build different language games, using multiplicity of meanings and the diversity of subjective understanding. But another effect of new technologies is the so-called suspension of space. Using the computer and the virtual web we can be in connection with any person in real time. We can see his or her pictures, we can change impressions about an event, be in a state of neighborhood, without borders or other obstacles. We can learn almost anything about anyone from anywhere in the world. Bauman has tried to show how computers have produced the decline of traditional public space.17 Instead of a Cosmopolis and an order of national states, we have a network of people who are connected in a global village. It is easy to travel far and wide so that the planet becomes a common space for all its citizens. We live in a world in which time is accelerated and space is compressed. 14 Edmund Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Philosophy, translation and introduction by David Carr, (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1970), p. 269. 15 Ibid., p. 170. 16 See Oswald Spengler, The Decline of the West. Form and Actuality, trad. Charles Francis Atkinson (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1926). 17 See Zigmunt Bauman, 1998, Globalization. The Human Consequences (New York: Columbia University Press, 1998). From Modern Cosmopolis into a Post-Modern Global Village 97 But even under conditions providing for an apparently unlimited access to the Internet, the global village suffers from what is called the \"digital divide\": different groups within a community or society don't have equal access to new technologies. Moreover, we could also speak about a global digital divide on an international scale between developing and developed countries. If we take into account the content which is transmitted, then we can identify a second level digital divide between the producers and the consumers of content. So, the global village, far from being an open space, leads to further internal fragmentation. According to Henry, in mass media we find the highest expression of barbarism, because the subjectivity and the sensibility are minimized, deleted, and replaced by technical procedures in the name of communicational efficiency. For example, television reduces life to an event. A suicide becomes an event for prime time news and journalists don't pay any attention or respect to human despair or to human dignity. Television reduces all events to incoherent and insignificant facts. Henry claims that mass media is the best example of mediocrity in social life. Mass media becomes in time the root of evil. Although initially mass media seemed to be an element of a rational and free society, it was used as a means for social control. Mass media has become, – let's use Marcuse's terms, without his ideological commitment, – a source of onedimensional man. The question raised by Marcuse becomes an exercise in rhetoric: \"Can we really distinguish between the mass media as instruments of information and entertainment, and as agents of manipulation and indoctrination?\" 18 A NEW AGENDA Is there an antidote to all this? I will try to portray a modest and minimal way to improve, to overcome the bottlenecks. In the paragraph \"From Leviathan to Lilliput,\"19 Toulmin asserts that we need a new intellectual agenda that forces us to shift the focus from stability and system to adaptability and function. For instance, the sovereign nation state has led to inequality at the international level. We need to take into account the suband transnational levels and to consider seriously multinational institutions and procedures. Things have already happened in this way in science. We passed from a disciplinary approach to subdisciplinary, transdisciplinary, and multidisciplinary perspectives. We have given up looking for a universal 18Herbert Marcuse, One-Dimensional Man. Studies in Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society (Boston: Beacon Press, 1964), p.8. 19Stephen Toulmin, Cosmopolis, The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 192-3. 98 Constantin Stoenescu method and we make science in a new mode, opened to context and centered on the needs of society.20 Undoubtedly, we are dealing with a change in all areas of society. But what do we have to do if we want to do the best? Toulmin notes some trends, philosophically supported, that could be seen as a revival of culture. Let's enumerate them: Return to timeliness. Philosophy worked traditionally with universal timeless questions but it's time to look at this strategy with skepticism. Even if our goal is to describe the order in Nature, it is a mistake to describe everything in terms of stability and hierarchy, using the pattern of cosmology. Biology, for example, suggests a discourse in terms of adaptation. Anyway, we don't deal only with abstract ideas, but also with flesh and blood human beings. As is done in clinical medicine, we must follow the \"course\" of a disease and to change the procedure.21 Return to the oral tradition. In last decades, text was recontextualized after a long period of decontextualization. Modernity keeps the text as such, in its letter, and the moderns focused on the rationality and meaning of different parts of language, preferably, on the printed text. But the return to oral language means the revival of discourse, rhetoric, and communication. The philosophical movement from propositions to utterances, speech, and forms of life was made gradually by Wittgenstein, J. L. Austin, Gadamer, and Habermas. The logical validity remains important, but it doesn't capture anything from the linguistic interactions between subjects in the context of discourse. Moreover, the reasoning itself depends of its context. The return to the particular. Modern Science has imposed the idea that knowledge is equal to the discovery and the understanding of universal. A scientific experiment must be intersubjectively testable in order to be available. But the temptation to generalize was challenged, first of all, by moral philosophers. They discussed so-called case ethics and rediscovered the casuistical traditions. Life isn't something abstract, real processes aren't just effects of essences, and actions aren't entirely the results of purely rational decisions. Applied ethics is as important as moral philosophy. -The return to the local. Modern philosophers thought that human nature was universal and that we didn't need to use our time for ethnographical or anthropological studies. The factual realities and the cultural differences don't matter in the search for the truth about the human person and peoples. But this view was overturned. Researchers are now taking the facts into account in their local context in trying to reconstruct the historical forms of life in their uniqueness. 20 For a larger debate on this topic see Gibbons et al. (1994). 21 For this analogy see Stephen Toulmin, Cosmopolis, The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992), p. 189. From Modern Cosmopolis into a Post-Modern Global Village 99 In my view, one way to unify and to save all these returns or reversions is to rediscover nature and to overcome the modern dichotomy between nature and culture. The global village would be truly designed starting from the natural dimensions of our life on our planet. In this respect, the environmental movement belongs to post-modernity. As environmental patterns of thought, I could mention Barry Commoner's book The Closing Circle or the Silent Spring manifesto published by Rachel Carson, and the idea of a \"deep ecology\" launched by Arne Naess. If we judge positively and optimistically, then we could claim that the modern Cosmopolis could be really replaced in an ecologistic way by a global village. As the environmentalists say, we are all in the same boat. Faculty of Philsophy University of Bucharest Bucharest, Romania noua_alianta@yahoo.com\n\nCHAPTER VIII HERMENEUTIC DIALOGUE AS SOCIAL VALUE: AN INQUIRY INTO \"UNDISCOVERABLE OBJECTS OF THOUGHT\"1 ADRIAN COSTACHE Abstract: In our globalized world as the locus of encounter between a multiplicity of cultures, religions, traditions, customs, and views of the world, hermeneutic dialogue is taken by a growing number of philosophers to be the social value par excellence. The reason for this, as Hans-Georg Gadamer argues, is that the dialogue that leads toward understanding another is ontologically constitutive to the human being and represents the foundation of our social and historical life. But is this really so? This study endeavors to offer an answer to this question through an analysis of the exchange between Gadamer and Jacques Derrida by showing first that Derrida's interpellation and \"critique\" of philosophical hermeneutics is neither nonsensical, nor misguided or misdirected as it has been intimated in the literature, but, rather, goes straight to the heart of the matter. Also, when properly understood, the phenomenon of language makes dialogue as philosophical hermeneutics conceives it and the social value attached to that dialogue both undesirable and impossible. Keywords: Dialogue, language, social values, hermeneutics, deconstruction. It is enough to take a quick glance at the dominant public discourses of any social sphere to be convinced of the value associated with dialogue, of the valuable character of dialogue in our society. Take, for example, the discourse on interdisciplinarity dominant in our academic institutions. What it comes down to and what it requires of every researcher is, in the end, an openness to dialogue with his or her peers from the other fields and a striving toward the constitution of a common language. In this sense Jacques Derrida remarks: ...I believe that no research is possible in a community (for example, academic) without the prior search for the minimal 1 This paper was written within The Knowledge Based Society Project supported by the Sectorial Operational Programme Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), financed from the European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract number POSDRU ID 56815. 102 Adrian Costache consensus and without discussion around this minimal consensus.2 In 1964 one of the most prominent religious institutions in the world, through the voice of Pope Paul VI, proclaimed: Dialogue is demanded nowadays...is demanded by the dynamic course of action which is changing the face of modern society. It is demanded by the pluralism of society and by the maturity man has reached in this day and age.3 After the pronouncement of this encyclical, theologian Leonard Swidler set out to establish the basic rules that ought to guide any intra-, interreligious and interideological dialogue whatsoever. Swidler's canon has the respectable quality of being both common sensical (i.e., easily acceptable) and exhaustive.4 Along with the \"ten commandments\" of dialogue (ten, of course) Swidler also offers us a vast array of conversation starters between the different Christian confessions and with the other great religions and the most prominent ideologies of our times (e.g. Marxism). In our institutions of education and in the sciences of education – the cradles of our societies and, respectively, their guiding light – dialogue is praised as the prominent means for the transmission of knowledge and the development of a harmonious personality well suited for active engagement in social life. And, in international relations and cultural studies, the idea of dialogue, of cross-cultural conversation, is taken as the only means for facing and diverting the perils confronting humanity as a whole in our times.5 If we do not engage in dialogue with our neighbors, if we do not heed to their voicing of their discontent and listen to their claims, our local conflicts could easily escalate into a war whose consequences are hardly imaginable in the atomic age. The only philosopher that begs to differ – at least, that we know of – is Richard Rorty, who does not question the valuable character of dialogue per se but, rather, its necessity. For him, cross-cultural conversation between West and East and how to make it happen should not be a concern for us in the West, because the West has 2Jacques Derrida, Limited Inc, trans. Alan Bass and Samuel Weber (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press, 1988), pp. 2-3., 146. 3Pope Paul the 6th, \"Ecclesiam Suam. No. 9, August 6,\" http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/paul_vi/encyclicals/documents/hf_pvi_enc_06081964_ecclesiam_en.html. 4See Leonard Swidler, After the Absolute. The Dialogical Future of Religious Reflection (Minneapolis: Fortress Press: 1990), pp. 42-46. 5See Anindita Balslev (ed.), Toward a Greater Human Solidarity. Options for a Plural World (Kolkata: Dasgupta & Co. Ltd., 2005). Hermeneutic Dialogue as Social Value 103 reached a cultural and civilizational peak that the East ought to try to achieve by following in the footsteps of the West and learning from it.6 All these discussions in few, albeit important, dimensions of our society attest in a convincing manner that dialogue is regarded as one of its highest values. But is it really a social value? A value in and for a society is one thing, a social value, another. An example in extremis shows us that there is a fine but nonetheless clear distinction here. Respect for the Arian race was definitely a value in German society in the 30s, but it was definitely not a social value, for it led to the extermination of a large part of it. It is our conviction that if one takes a closer look at what could be called the \"dynamic genesis\" of dialogue, understood simply as an exchange of ideas or views about a matter at hand between an \"I\" and a \"Thou,\" it becomes apparent that dialogue is not only a value in and for our society, but the social value par excellence. From the point of view of what we call \"dynamic genesis,\" from the point of view of the factical circumstances in which the dialogue with an other is established, it is manifest that it presupposes as a precondition the existence of a third person. Dialogue, just like society, involves a third along with myself and the other, for only with the appearance of the third and through the third is the other seen as an other \"I,\" thus as a \"Thou.\" Otherwise, the other is perceived as a non-\"I\" whose claim to truth need not be heard and who can be treated as an object, as a means, but never as an end in itself. The third brings about and embodies the law that institutes and governs all possible and acceptable relations between human beings. This is readily apparent. In a lonely world the first encounter with an Other is experienced either as the arrival of a long awaited guest or as the violation of an intruder. The Other I love or hate; I befriend or attack as foe; I cherish or exploit for my own advantage. And I do all these \"silently,\" without ever wanting or trying to understand him or her. Only with the third person, the neutral, indifferent Other, who comes after the long awaited one has arrived or after the familiarity of my world has been violated, does the necessity to understand the Other, to engage him or her in dialogue, to listen to his or her claim to truth and to expose mine appear. Otherwise it is unnecessary. This is the greatest lesson we have been taught by Daniel Defoe's Robinson Crusoe. But it is also one of the great lessons of psychoanalysis. Re-read Defoe and you will see that so long as Robinson is alone with Friday on the island, there is no dialogue taking place. Friday is told what to do and how to behave; he is told how to think and what are the standards with which to judge his deeds. He is told over and over again that he is a savage and is engaged in a process of transformation, a becoming, that will annul everything that he has been, that is, to annul himself. The moth 6 See Anindita Balslev, Cultural Otherness. Correspondence with Richard Rorty (New York & London: Oxford University Press, 1999), p.19. 104 Adrian Costache becomes a butterfly nimble and gentle, thus well suited for the company of gentleman, but only at the price of its annihilation. Friday is never given by the more powerful (because armed) Robinson the chance to state his claim to truth, to say what he thinks and feels, to express his views about Robinson's customs. He is taken as an entity readyto-hand that is to be instructed (\"educated\") so as to fulfill Robinson's desire for company. Dialogue first occurs on the island only with the arrival of the Spaniard – Robinson's equal, more or less, for which reason he is more or less indifferent to him – and with the planning for leaving that Godforsaken place disguised as a tropical paradise. But we can go even further with our dynamic genesis of dialogue taking a step back from the situation of an I in a lonely world to the very moment the ego enters the world for the first time. This is the great lesson of psychoanalysis. As Melanie Klein showed, the child's becoming a social being by yielding to the injunctions of the superego (the instance of social order per se) and the development of his or her ability to speak (to employ sounds made by his or her body as words) mark the same stage of his or her development – the passing from the paranoid-schizoid to the depressive position and the formation of the oedipal complex. And this takes place only through the separation of the father's body from the mother's – that is, through splitting the Other in half and thus by the appearance in the child's world of a second Other, a third. In view of all these, we take it we have established with a certain level of conviction that dialogue is the social value par excellence. When seen at the same time and through the same conditions, dialogue and society might very well be co-originary. Coming into being at the same time, one might be the form or give the law of the other: there's no society but through dialogue, or there can be no dialogue outside certain sociality. Thus, along with Derrida we could say that nothing is truly good for a society, for any community whatsoever, but the good will to understand the other, to understand one another at play as a fundamental precondition every time someone begins a dialogue. This good will, taken as a \"commitment to the desire for consensus in understanding\" is \"not just one of the axioms of ethics. It is the point where ethics begins for any community of speakers, even regulating the phenomena of disagreement and misunderstanding.\"7 But does this axiom refer to something real? Is dialogue as exchange of views about a matter at hand between an \"I\" and a \"Thou\" real, if not in the strong philosophical sense of Realität at least as Wirklichkeit? Or is it, 7Diane Mitchelfelder and Richard E. Palmer, eds., Dialogue and Deconstruction. The Gadamer-Derrida Encounter (Albany, New York: State University of New York Press, 1989), p. 52. Hermeneutic Dialogue as Social Value 105 as Derrida puts it, an \"unfindable object of thought,\"8 a mere illusion of reason sprung forth in the shadows of society? (Which would explain their com-possibility and the appearance of their co-originarity...) Throughout the history of philosophy the idea of dialogue, the possibility of dialogue and its reality, has been taken as the most evident thing in the world, even as self-evident. That is why, from Plato to Gadamer, philosophy is usually defined as the soul's dialogue with itself. It goes to Derrida's credit to have questioned for the first time the evidence of dialogue for Western thought. And he did it during his first ever encounter with Gadamer in Paris in 1981. The encounter was a carefully planned event, being regarded from the very beginning by the organizers from the Goethe Institute as a context for a head-on confrontation between the two major philosophical orientations of the times: hermeneutics and deconstruction. In good faith and animated by the good will to understand the other, Gadamer prepared a talk on text and interpretation marking explicitly several cues that would facilitate the dialogue with Derrida.9 Derrida did nothing of the sort. He delivered a speech on signatures in Nietzsche10 and, when it came to the discussions part, he addressed Gadamer three questions that seemed unrelated to what he said.11 That is why the first gesture of most interpreters of the whole affair was either to question Derrida's seriousness or to project behind his words a hidden strategy meant to put in question dialogue on ethical grounds. Is dialogue to be searched for? Isn't it an expression of the will to power, and thus a means of domination? We have seen in the first paragraph quoted in this paper that for the French philosopher, too, dialogue is to be sought after, that it has a social value. We do not have the space to show here that Derrida's questions are not to be taken as mere frivolities. We did it elsewhere, convincingly, we hope. What we would like to do is, rather, to show that the French philosopher is actually right in describing dialogue as an \"unfindable object of thought\" by reconstructing (but not necessarily rehearsing) his investigation into the problematics of language pursued in Of Grammatology and Dissemination. The question of language is a key problem for any hermeneutic project whatsoever. On the terrain of language, on the question of the reality, the unreality of dialogue is decided. 8 Ibid., p. 52. 9See Hans-Georg Gadamer, \"Text and Interpretation\" in Diane Mitchelfelder and Richard Palmer, eds., Dialogue and Deconstruction. The Gadamer-Derrida Encounter, pp. 21-51. 10See Jacques Derrida, \"Interpreting Signatures (Nietzsche/Heidegger): Two Questions\" in Diane Mitchelfelder and Richard Palmer, eds., Dialogue and Deconstruction. The Gadamer-Derrida Encounter, pp.58-71. 11Jacques Derrida, \"Three Questions to Hans-Georg Gadamer\" in Diane Mitchelfelder and Richard Palmer, eds., Dialogue and Deconstruction. The Gadamer-Derrida Encounter, pp. 52-54. 106 Adrian Costache Whereas in his philosophical hermeneutics Gadamer approaches language from a diachronic point of view, trying to describe the movement of its constitution and the process whereby it stocks within itself human experience becoming thus a \"view of the world,\" Derrida approaches it in strictly synchronic terms. For him, too, language is a \"view of the world,\" but as a system of differences subjected to an arbitrary bonding. As Ferdinand de Saussure has shown, formally, language is a system of signs taken as the union of an acoustic image (signifier) and a mental representation (signified) bonded together simply because each differs from all the other acoustic images and mental representations possible. For example, what makes \"five\" an English word is that the sequence of sounds \"f-i-v-e\" constituting it is different from all the other sequences of sounds that can be uttered in English and that it sends to the determinate idea \"5.\" In Course in General Linguistics Saussure writes: Psychologically our thought – apart from its expression in words – is only a shapeless and indistinct mass. Philosophers and linguists have always agreed in recognizing that without the help of signs we would be unable to make a clear-cut, consistent distinction between two ideas. [...] The characteristic role of language with respect to thought is not to create a material phonetic means for expressing ideas but to serve as a link between thought and sound, under conditions that of necessity bring about the reciprocal delimitation of units.12 But if language is constituted as a system of arbitrary signs, the fundamental principle governing it being the principle of differentiation, insomuch as language is a system of differences without positive terms then every linguistic sign is forced to carry within itself traces of all the other signs of the language to which it belongs. For example, sending to the idea \"5\" the word \"five\" sends also to \"4\" and \"6\" as those natural numbers preceding and, respectively, following it, the numbers that make it possible and, respectively, those made possible by it; \"5\" appears through the addition of a unit to \"4\" and serves to the constitution of \"6\" through the addition of a unit to it. Gadamer obviously knew something of this when in Truth and Method he spoke about a \"center of language\" and its \"speculative nature\": ...every word breaks forth as if from a center and is related to a whole, through which alone it is a word. Every word causes the 12Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics, ed. Charles Bally, Albert Sechehaye, and Albert Riedlinger, trans. Wade Baskin (New York, Toronto & London: McGraw Hill, 1998), pp. 112-113. Hermeneutic Dialogue as Social Value 107 whole of the language to which it belongs to resonate and the whole world-view that underlies it to appear.13 What neither Gadamer nor Saussure knew, but should have known, for it is one step away from these premises, is that by carrying within itself the traces of all the other signs of the language to which it belongs, every sign \"is\" ontologically the sign of something that is not given in language, of another order than language and, in general, of something that can never be present as such. The \"unmotivatedness\" of the sign requires a synthesis in which the completely other is announced as such – without any simplicity, and identity, any semblance or continuity – within what is not.14 (italics are mine) In truth, the work of the principle of differentiation in language can be carried on to infinity. The signifiers can be forever differentiating themselves from all the other signifiers just like the signifieds can. This is the reason why the final term of the sequence of signifiers and, respectively, signifieds serving as reference for the differentiation of the antepenultimate and all the others before it is, in fact, itself always already antepenultimate. Derrida calls \"différance\" – with an \"a\" (not the usual \"e\") written but never read or pronounced15 – this \"completely other\" announcing itself in language only to ceaselessly withhold its presence from it and from the present. As soon as it makes its trace seen, this différance renders the idea of dialogue de facto impossible. It is easy to see that insomuch as the possibility of meaning is tied to the ceaseless deferral of its full presence from itself brought along by the \"completely other\" inhabiting language, the \"Thou\" expressing itself in and through language will itself be forced to forever become an other. The constant deferral of the full presence of meaning from itself will engage also a deferral of the \"Thou\" speaking to the \"I,\" obviously, just as it defers the presence of the \"I\" to the \"Thou.\" Between parentheses, we should note that if it is true, as the hermeneutic philosophies of Heidegger, Gadamer, and Ricoeur contend, that language either as Rede, Gesprach, or narrative is an ontological condition of human existence, then we ought to say that différance as the \"completely other\" inhabiting language suspends not only the presence of the \"I\" and the \"Thou\" but also their stable identity as such. Through the play of différance 13 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method, trans. Joel Weinsheimer and Donald G. Marshall (London & New York: Continuum, 2004), p. 454. 14 Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore & London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997), p.47. 15 See Jacques Derrida, \"Différance\" in Margins of Philosophy, trans. Alan Bass (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1982), pp.1-27. 108 Adrian Costache the \"I\" and the \"Thou\" become many, \"I\" and \"Thou\" labeling multiplicities. Thus, a dialogue aimed at understanding an other will not be an actual dialogue with the other as such, but with an other that has been. For as soon as the other has expressed his or her position, he or she ceases to be who he or she was and becomes an other. In this sense the possibly other than myself whom I engaged in dialogue becomes a mere projection of my endeavor to understand an other as myself. Despite how complicated it may sound what is referred to here is something quite simple. Anyone familiar with how a therapeutic session goes knows very well that simply by discussing what he or she thinks and feels, by putting his or her mental state into words, the patient gains a certain relief, this constituting also the first step of the cure. What we are actually witnessing here is a movement of becoming an other rendered possible by the fact that through its very expression, the expressed meaning brings to light other meanings and other ways of being the patient could assume. But différance puts the possibility in question not only of what might we call its \"I\" – \"Thou\" axis, but also on that of the \"Sache,\" the matter at hand, or the theme around which any dialogue whatsoever revolves. In the hermeneutic tradition the possibility of the \"Sache\" has always been taken for granted. Philosophical hermeneutics in particular go so far as to even define dialogue in terms of it. Above, we were actually following Gadamer closely in defining dialogue as \"an exchange of ideas or views about a matter at hand between an \"I\" and a \"Thou.\" Insomuch as we assume the play of différance in language, though, the possibility of the Sache becomes problematic. For this play, in a paradoxical manner, makes language at the same time rich and poor in meaning. It is rich for the reason that every signifier will send meaning to the idea signified plus all the other ideas on which the first depends plus the trace of the \"completely other\" of différance. And poor for, insomuch as it makes any idea signified dependent on others, this \"completely other\" indirectly signified represents basically a depletion of the fullness of meaning. By being rich and poor in meaning, though, language is endowed with a \"certain inexhaustibility\"16 transcending the possibilities of the concept of horizon. The play of différance makes us say both more and less than we want to say each time we open our mouths or put pen to paper, and what is actually said exceeds the boundaries of the horizon of meaning of what could have been said. The \"completely other\" of différance pierces through the horizon that might encircle any meaning uttered and thus it displaces its limits. In this manner the play of différance prevents the appearance of a matter at hand in any dialogue and does not let any theme become thematic. 16Jacques Derrida, Positions, trans. Alan Bass (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1981), p. 250. Hermeneutic Dialogue as Social Value 109 But insomuch as no dialogue gravitates toward one matter at hand, this does not mean that it gravitates toward two or any other determinate number. The play of différance actually transforms the to and fro movement of question and answer in a chaotic movement going in an indefinite number of directions at once. Now, this is again complicated talk for designating something quite common. Many are the cases when we start talking with someone about one thing, end up talking about something else, after having made quite a few digressions, and the only thing we recall afterward is how our interlocutor pronounces certain words or his or her smile. Here we find the play of différance with its exceeding of intentionality and the displacement of the horizon of meaning at its finest. Now we can understand that, as Realität, the reality of dialogue is actually out of the question. For, as we have seen, there can never be a true exchange between the \"I\" and the \"Thou,\" because each is forever becoming an other in the process. What takes place in our speaking to one another is really a simulacrum of exchange. And such a simulacrum never takes place around a matter at hand for the flow of uttered words does not go in the direction of a dominant meaning but in all directions possible. But neither is the reality of dialogue as Wirklichkeit very real. If a conversation happens to have any effects on the partners this is only by accident. For this reason, from the point of view of the expectations leading them to engage in conversation, their impact can only be very low, if not completely insignificant. The disparaging of the power of dialogue for the development of human relations and social life and the introduction of chance in understanding, though, should not be taken as a nihilist gesture. We are not proclaiming here that all is good for nothing, and we are not advocating muteness. On the contrary, we are proclaiming life and advocating the necessity of reconstructing the idea of dialogue in other terms, ones that would increase its efficacy and make it more real (Wirklich). In our opinion, the axioms of this reconstruction can be found, above all, in Gilles Deleuze's thought, but their being put to work presupposes giving up quite a few of our philosophical obsessions. If we would like our dialogues to matter, to change something in ourselves and others, and eventually to change our world, first of all, we will have to give up our obsession with the question of being, to renounce any philosophy of being altogether in favor of a philosophy of multiplicity, of the \"and.\" We will have to learn how to think not in terms of what \"is\" this or that, and not out of the wonder that there \"is\" something rather than nothing, but in terms of and this and that and that and... Such a metaphysics of the \"and\" will lead us to the realization that the speaking subject and the \"I\" that engages a \"Thou\" in dialogue (just like the \"Thou\") is not the substratum of the world, respectively, a transcendental condition of possibility. Rather, the speaking subject is a collective assemblage of enunciation through whose speech a multiplicity of order110 Adrian Costache words is expressed, and the \"I,\" the intersection of various series of singularities and its actualization according to a rule. We \"are\" collections of singularities – a smile, a scar, a gesture, a belief or another, this or that emotion, several thoughts... And, second of all, we will have to stop attributing language and discourse (either written or spoken) any privilege. We will have to finally understand that although the flow of words is the only one to have meaning, it has just as much or as little sense as any other flow. The sense of the flow of sound taking the form of music or of a howl is not inferior to that of a philosophical text or a poem. Each is just a flow like any other; it pushes us toward one direction or another. When we have learned to give up these philosophical obsessions, we arrive at the only rule of dialogue, the only axiom of the \"ethics of discussion\" (Derrida): do everything in your power to touch and join the other; do everything possible so that the flow of your words intersects and gets interconnected with the other's, or with the flow of his or her gestures, or song, or dance... whichever. Never interpret, analyze, or criticize what the other says. Interpretation never led anyone anywhere. Rather, try to establish points of communication so that something comes to pass between you, something that changes both and leads to the construction of a \"meyou.\" The goal is to create other flows from those given, to create something new. As Deleuze puts it: This could be what a conversation is – simply the outline of a becoming. The wasp and the orchid provide the example. The orchid seems to form a wasp image, but in fact there is a waspbecoming of the orchid, and an orchid-becoming of the wasp, a double capture since 'what' each becomes changes no less than that 'which becomes.' The wasp becomes part of the orchid's reproductive apparatus at the same time as the orchid becomes the sexual organ of the wasp. One and the same becoming, a single block of becoming, or, as Rémy Chauvin says, an 'aparallel evolution of two beings who have nothing whatsoever to do with one another.'17 The precise contours of this new form of dialogue are yet to be traced, but from its axioms, it announces itself to be more real and more fruitful than the other. Romanian Academy Jassy, Romania johnadriancostache@gmail.com 17 Gilles Deleuze and Claire Parnet, Dialogues, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam (New York: Columbia University Press, 1987), pp.2-3. CHAPTER IX RATIONALITY AS A HUMAN VALUE LAVINIA MARIN Abstract: Rationality is not a value in itself but it can be used in contexts where a debate among opposing values or cultures takes place, thus making it valuable in an instrumental way. In order for rationality to work as a mediator in discussions about conflicting values we have to assume a Scanlonian contractualist framework and also a few other virtues of thought such as as maturity, imagination, sympathy, and culture. Keywords: rationality, values, contractualism, cultural difference, objectivity, autonomy, instrumental, intrinsic The modern times in which we live have generated several new problems, some of them being caused by the unprecedented situation of the culturally mixed environment in which we all have come to live. Nowadays, more than ever before, people of different cultures and religions live together in big cities and are forced to interact with the \"strangeness\" of others' cultural backgrounds on a daily basis. The problems arise when the education one has received doesn't provide enough basis for this interaction; this problem is not only a social one – namely how are we to behave in culturally mixed environments – but it's also a philosophical one because it makes people reevaluate their own values and attitudes toward values. A person can be quite neutral about his or her values in a culturally homogenous environment, yet when confronted with shockingly different values, one might develop unexpected behaviors, such as violence, aggression, self-doubt, and feelings of social inadequacy. The internalization of the statement that there are different people out there who don't believe the same things as oneself, and that maybe they are not necessarily wrong while oneself is not wrong either, requires a certain philosophical background and preparation. Most people are not prepared philosophically to argue for their values, to concede when necessary, to defend those values, to negotiate and accept compromises. Most people still live in the paradigm of the \"one and only truth, my truth\" while thinking that everybody else is dead wrong. How can philosophy be of help in these cases? How are we to use philosophical thought as a tool to reconcile these differences and make possible a self-fulfilled life among strangers? As Donald Davidson pointed out, we all think our values are objective: In our unguarded moments we all tend to be objectivists about values. We see ourselves as arguing with others who maintain values opposed to ours. In the heat of dispute it does not seem 112 Lavinia Marin that we are expressing attitudes with which our opponents are at liberty to differ, nor do we think we are merely trying to bring them to share our goals. We are convinced that we are right and they are wrong, not just in the sense that our values are better than theirs, or more enlightened, but that we are objectively correct and they are not. We assume, and assert, that our judgments of what is good, right, or just are true, and that those who disagree with us hold false views (Donald Davidson, The Objectivity of Values, Problems of Rationality). When individuals feel isolated inside multicultural communities, their response is either the diminishing of trust in one's own values or the emerging need to defend one's values publicly and perhaps to perform solitary acts of fanaticism. On the other hand, when a large homogenous community contains a few minorities that require respect and a voice in the community, the majority feels threatened by this diversity and feels the need to repress these manifestations, even though nothing illegal has happened. Such were the cases in Romania when the gay community wanted to be seen and heard through at its annual \"gay pride\" marches – immediately a reaction appeared from the religious orthodox community who wanted to assert its values at the same time, on the same day, and in the same place, by another march, one of Christian pride. Two marches took place in the same time and the situation almost escalated to a riot. Why did the majority feel threatened by this display of different values and why did it feel the need to assert its presence, which was otherwise well expressed in everyday life? The most obvious answer would be that people can't be rational about their own values when they feel threatened, even though in other areas of life they are perfectly rational. Yet I would like to propose the mediation of rationality in exactly such cases of cultural difference and conflicting values. How are we supposed to talk in public about our own values? How are we to negotiate our values in a multicultural society? It all depends on what type of values are we discussing: communitarian values lead to a necessary dialogue between communities, while personal values lead to the dialogue between the community and the individual or between different individuals inside the community framework. We need to have this dialogue because we want meaningful lives and such lives are impossible without being integrated socially. We don't want to be left out, alone with our values; we want to share them with a community or with a few peers, at least. A few examples of conflicting values are the following: traditionalism vs modernity, patriotism vs cosmopolitanism, hierarchy vs equality, individualism vs solidarity, risk-taking vs safety, health vs. pleasure. I am not going to enter into the metaphysics of values here but in general it is accepted that there are two types of values: intrinsic values and instrumental ones. Instrumental values are those which are good because Rationality as a Human Value 113 they serve a higher purpose which is good in itself, for example health is valuable because it serves and prolongs human life, which is valuable in itself. However, this distinction isn't as clear-cut as we would want it; there are people for whom instrumental values became intrinsic values, health being again the suitable example. When people choose their values there are a few possible attitudes that I will outline here: We can be irrational when choosing our values yet defend them in a rational manner. We can be rational about our values yet be fanatic about them and refuse any type of dialogue. Most of the time, these types of attitudes, and not necessarily the values in themselves, generate the responses we get from the other participants in the dialogue. RATIONALITY AND VALUES Wittgenstein once said in the Tractatus that goodness, value, or meaning are not to be found in the world; therefore his conclusion was that one shouldn't talk about such things, as it was a pointless endeavor. The tendency of all men who ever tried to write or talk Ethics or Religion was to run against the boundaries of language (Wittgenstein, Lecture on Ethics, 1929). Good is outside the space of facts (Wittgenstein, Culture and Value, p. 3). Wittgenstein's point here was that one cannot argue rationally for certain values, as rationality has a constraining effect. If there were a mathematical proof of what is beauty and, following this proof, most of what we think as beautiful would be considered ugly, would we give up our aesthetic judgment? Would we start thinking that what was once beautiful is now ugly for certain? Of course not, we would still perceive beauty in spite of our own rationality or judgment. Yet here comes the problem we need to face: in our social dialogue in the multicultural society we need to talk rationally about values; we can't have a public discourse that is irrational when we negotiate values. Yet philosophically speaking we also know that we shouldn't talk about values at all, as there is nothing to say, as Wittgenstein warned us. So how are we to talk about something about which we should keep silent? The solution I propose is to use rationality not in order to say what values are, but rather to say how we should behave in a value-ridden context. Rationality can be 114 Lavinia Marin used as a means to reach social consensus and set boundaries between the public and private display of value allegiance. The rights that occur from values are determined partially by how we see values, as either objective or subjective, and also by the attitudes people have toward them: either autonomous or dependent. If our values are objective, are we entitled to impose them upon others? I personally think that truth doesn't need eloquent lawyers, as it makes a case for itself. What we can do effectively is just create the conditions necessary for people to see the true values more clearly. However, if we tried to impose them dogmatically, their objectivity would become futile. If, on the other hand, our values are subjective and we acknowledge this, we can't impose them on anyone, but we can argue that, although they are subjective, the world would be a better place if more people would adopt them. If we chose our values by an autonomous process of thinking, it doesn't make any sense to impose them dogmatically to someone else because the autonomy of the others would be breached. However, it is the duty of every rational person to manifest a certain critical detachment toward one's own values because, in order to rationally talk about values, one has to keep in mind that none of the interlocutors has chosen his/her values completely autonomously. Up to a point in our lives, our values were imposed upon us. So neither interlocutor can argue for the objectivity of one's values. If one assumes subjectivity on the interlocutor's part, one has to assume subjectivity for oneself as well. And if one assumes objectivity about one's values, one has to concede the same to the opponent. Only if this condition is fulfilled can we have a genuine dialogue about values. Sometimes, even if we share the same values as our own community, the difference in attitudes toward them can make us strangers inside the same community: we can see those values as instrumental and not final, we can chose other means to serve or respect those values, we can interpret those values to mean something different than the majority ruled. Every value in the world can generate fanaticism, as the cause is not in the value itself, but in the attitude toward it. In order to have fanaticism, one would have to think that the value is intrinsic, that there is only one correct interpretation of it and only one way of serving or respecting that value, everything else being blasphemy and defilement. Being rational about one's own values is very hard because, as Francis Bacon shows, rationality has the tendency to overlook arguments against its point and give preference to favorable arguments. Up to a point, rationality can be misguided by values, but only if we never engage in a dialogue about values. In such a dialogue the errors we make can be easily pointed out by an outside observer. The human understanding when it has once adopted an opinion draws all things else to support and agree with it. And though there be a greater number and weight of instances to be found on Rationality as a Human Value 115 the other side, yet these it either neglects and despises, or else by some distinction sets aside and rejects, in order that by this great and pernicious predetermination the authority of its former conclusion may remain inviolate (Francis Bacon). The requirement for any rational person would be, then, to be critical and open to discussion about one's values and yet remain loyal to them – a very hard task. Rationality can be classified in many ways but, following the work of Max Weber, we notice that rationality falls in almost the same categories as value does: we have instrumental rationality (zweckrational), a sort of technocratic thinking related to the means used to attain certain ends, and intrinsic rationality (Wertrational) which is value or belieforiented. So, how can we use rationality when discussing values? One obvious proposal would be to use it in order to check for internal consistency of value sets, but this would be a misuse of rationality, because on one hand it does too little and, on the other hand, as Simon Blackburn points out, internal coherence doesn't give us much to work with as there may be an infinite number of internally coherent systems of values. We can appeal as well to other virtues of thought, such as maturity, imagination, sympathy, culture. An immature, unimaginative, unsympathetic, and uncultivated ethic might be quite coherent, in the way that the Decalogue is quite coherent. But that does not make it the last word (Simon Blackburn, Ruling Passions). We can't argue for or against a certain set of values, but we can argue for rational behavior while holding a certain set of values. We don't want just the \"right values,\" we need to be rational about them. That is to be moderate, mature, sympathetic, and imaginative about them. All these are rational qualities and we need them in order not to fall into the traps of fanaticism or intolerance. If one adopts a rational attitude toward one's values in the sense outlined by Blackburn, one should be safe from fanaticism, no matter what values one holds. Another way of using rationality to rule in cases concerning opposing values would be to use Scanlon's contractualism, which presupposes a mutual recognition between rational agents. What Scanlon's contractualism proposes is \"a way of living with others which is typified by an ideal of mutual recognition between rational agents, where mutual recognition demands that moral agents acknowledge the value of human life and respond to this value in the right ways.\" (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T._ M._Scanlon) There are a few major forms of contractualism and Scanlon's has its distinct place among them. First I will make a few distinctions and show 116 Lavinia Marin how contractualism fits in but also distinguishes from the main forms of similar political thought. Contractarianism appeared first in Hobbes' writings, and the main idea was based on mutual self-interest. People were agreeing to cooperate because it was mutually advantageous for all the selfish subjects involved in it. Contractualism, however, is based on the equal moral status of each person involved, because the persons are seen as autonomous agents, each one with one's own rationality and purposes. According to contractualism, morality consists in what would result if we were to make binding agreements from a point of view that respects our equal moral importance as rational autonomous agents (Ashford, Elizabeth and Mulgan, Tim, \"Contractualism,\" The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). There are at least three main types of contractualism: Kantian, Rawlsian, and Scanlonian, and all of them presuppose a rational agent that seeks to pursue one's interests in ways that are justifiable to other agents who have different interests in mind. In the Kantian type, the contractualist establishes certain principles with which all rational agents would agree, while the Scanlonian contractualist seeks principles that that no one can reasonably reject, rather than principles all rational people would agree to. Rawls' contractualism is first of all a political one rather than an ethical one (as it is the case with Scanlon's) and second, in following Kant's work, also seeks principles that all rational agents would agree to. Scanlon, by contrast, invokes no veil of ignorance. I know my own circumstances. It is not self-interest combined with ignorance of self that makes me take account of everyone's interests, but rather my concern to justify myself to everyone else (Ashford, Elizabeth and Mulgan, Tim, \"Contractualism,\" The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). By not using the veil of ignorance and assuming from the start the known situation of the moral subject, Scanlon insures that the rational agents can in fact argue for particular sets of values that would have been unthinkable behind the veil of ignorance, and this makes it very useful in arguing real life positions. Also, by ensuring that the consensus reached concerns principles that no one would reasonably reject, Scanlon's contractualism has another advantage, as it aggregates the opinions faster because people will focus on where they all agree rather than on what separates them. Not using idealised rational agents makes this type of contractualism more suitable for real life situations also. What about Utilitarianism? Is contractualism a better framework for a rational dialogue than Utilitarianism? First of all, one has to notice that Rationality as a Human Value 117 contractualism doesn't apply to all of morality (unlike Utilitarianism) but only to the public sphere of it, in the realm of what we owe to each other. Secondly, by not seeing the well-being of persons as a basic moral concept, contractualism makes room for other types of values and personal preferences that Utilitarianism couldn't. Utilitarianism supposes an underlying set of moral values with happiness, pleasure, or well-being among them, and this makes it unsuitable as a framework for discussions when other types of values are involved, values that cannot be reduced to well-being or that even oppose it. Instead of lumping everyone together and allowing one person's rights to be trampled to provide greater aggregate benefits to others, contractualism recognises that each of us has a unique life to live. The contractualist objection to utilitarianism is that it does not guarantee principles that benefit each individually, and that command each person's free assent (Ashford, Elizabeth and Mulgan, Tim, \"Contractualism,\" The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). By considering the principles that no one could reasonably reject, Scanlon's contractualism facilitates the finding of common grounds between subjects with extremely different views and values and, while doing that, it doesn't suppose that there is one unique rational attitude toward value, but that there have to be certain principles that all people adhere to if they want to live together. When objecting to someone else's principles the subject has to take into consideration not only the burden it imposes on itself, but also how it affects others in the same community: if strangers have to bear a greater burden than I do, although my inherent egoism tells me to pursue the principle benefiting me the most, the rational principles to which we all agree tell me to yield. An act is wrong if its performance under the circumstances would be disallowed by any set of principles for the general regulation of behavior that no one could reasonably reject as a basis for informed, unforced, general agreement (Scanlon 1998, p. 153). In Scanlons's contractualism, the main moral predicate is \"wrong\" while the \"right\" is defined as the absence of wrong. No wrong act can be justified to others and this is what all wrong acts have in common. We might not all agree on what we want to happen to ourselves but a common agreement on what we don't want to happen can be reached. We should expect enlightened values – the reasons we would have for valuing and acting if we had all the (non-evaluative) facts straight – to converge; we should expect people who are 118 Lavinia Marin enlightened and fully understand one another to agree on their basic values\" (Donald Davidson, Problems of Rationality). Following Davidson's account of rationality, I think we can all agree that rationality may be used as a universal language common to all sets of values and as a mediation tool. CASE STUDIES Even inside the same culture there can be diverging opinions concerning the same set of values to which everyone adheres. Let's take the case of the smoking ban imposed by the state upon its citizens. The main reason for doing this lies in seeing human health as an intrinsic value. When the State tells people not to smoke, not to eat junk food, or to exercise more, the State actually tells them that they should pursue certain purposes. However, people have the right to disagree with the State and they can bring arguments against these kinds of policies. Even if we also believe that health is a value worth pursuing, we might think of it as an instrumental value, not an intrinsic one, like the instrument for a happy life. If a life of smoking and eating junk food makes me happier and more fulfilled, the State has no case against me. I can argue rationally that for me this is a better life even if shorter. How can the State argue in a contractualist way against my smoking? If the State says: \"smoking kills you,\" then I can reply: \"I know this, but the quality of life I lead until death will be much improved because I will be much happier.\" And then the State will have to yield. However, if the state says: \"your smoking kills others (by second-hand smoke)\" – then I have no possible rational argument to defeat this (unless I am to deny the premise). In the case of eating junk food and exercising, the State has no right to tell me what to do because it's telling me how I am to be rational about my life and that an instrumental value should be an intrinsic one. The State is actually telling me that my rationality about health should be Wertrational (value-oriented) and not instrumental, but it has no way of proving that. A second case study concerns the recent controversy regarding the wearing of the Islamic veil in France, or L'affaire du Voile, as it was called.This is a typical cross-cultural conflict about values, with both parties involved coming from different cultures with different values. Below is a summary of the main arguments for and against the scarf: For the scarf Against the scarf \"Respectability\" and \"discretion.\" Submission to men Avoidance of violence Not a free choice/ public pressure Muslim identity Laïcité arguments Rationality as a Human Value 119 The people who argued for the scarf had the following arguments: a) The argument of the \"respectability\" and \"discretion.\" This was a typical example of how an attribute such as \"respectable\" has different meanings in different communities. For the Islamic community, a girl showing her hair was seen as offering herself, being \"easy\" and promiscuous. By wearing the veil, the girls stated their virtue and unavailability to strangers. b) Avoidance of violence. In some neighborhoods there were cases of unveiled women being targeted by attacks of Muslim men. c) Muslim identity. By wearing the veil, the girls clearly differentiated themselves from the local Western people and stated their cultural background in an obvious way. The motivations of those opposed to allowing hijabs to be worn in schools: a) The feminist arguments stated that the wearing of the veil symbolized women's submission to men as the wearing of the hijab was not by free choice but rather imposed by family and by the social pressure. b) Another argument stated that France is a laic state and the wearing religious clothes in schools infringes upon this constitutional principle. How are we to rationally evaluate these arguments presupposing a Scanlonian contractualism? The arguments for wearing the veil are all culturally embedded; they infer that because the Islamic culture is such and such and we cannot change it, we have to abide by it. a) The argument of the \"respectability\" and \"discretion\" advances prejudices. As in Eastern culture \"easy\" women are judged by their clothes, the same thing happens in Islamic culture to women, just that there are different types of clothes and opposite judgments. Instead of challenging these prejudices, this argument states that we should live by them. b) The argument against the violence makes a point: who would want to get hurt? But then again, the practice of people hurting unveiled women shouldn't be accepted, because it's something illegal. It shouldn't count in the general norm just as the risk of crime or theft shouldn't count – we don't assume theft when we make laws, we fight against it. If we lived in a country ruled by a mob and the general practice was to pay protection fees to them, this would make it rational to follow this rule in a practical or instrumental way, but not in a universally justifiable way. c) The identity argument. If the identity of Islam were given by the practice to wrap women in veils and only by this practice alone, then this argument would make sense. However, we all know that Islam is much more than this. Also Western Christian identity for a long time accepted the submission of women and treating them as inferior, forbidding them to work or to get an education. The Western Christian world has actually given up this practice without losing its identity. Identities change over time 120 Lavinia Marin and this should be encouraged if these identities involve the unfair treatment of other human beings. All three arguments so far show a non-critical attitude by Muslims toward their own values. The arguments against wearing the veil are also of cultural origin to some extent. d) The submission to men. If the law had stated that men should dress in a certain way also, it wouldn't have been a submission to men anymore. If the law that forces women to wear the veil had been passed by women would it have been just then? e) The argument stating that women don't want to wear the veil but are forced to do so. We need sociological studies to prove that women would not actually want to wear the veil if they had a choice. But if this is true, then we have found the principle that no one could reasonably reject: no culture should make its citizens do something they don't want to do. John Stuart Mill argues for the Harm Principle, which says that the only legitimate grounds for social coercion is to prevent harm to others, but what harm to others prevents the wearing of the veil? f) The argument in favor of the laïcité is also an identity issue, but for France. If it is so important for France not to lose its laic identity, the same right should be also conceded for Muslim people – namely, not to lose their religious identity. CONCLUSIONS Public debates about values are possible if a) We assume the opponents to be rational b) We all agree upon a contractualist framework (Scanlonian) c) We are critical and detached about our own values first, that is to say, rational. We all have the fundamental right to hold other values than those of the society's in which we live, even if the society has chosen these values by vote or in an utilitarian fashion by preference aggregation. The life of every individual is unique and should be lived to its maximum potential. A gay person has to look for happiness even when born in a homophobic society; he can't put his life or his happiness on hold because he had the misfortune of being born in the wrong place. We don't have the option of giving up on a happy and fulfilled life, so we need to negotiate our values with whomever we can. And for this we need to appeal to the common ground of rationality; rationality in itself is not a value, but its employment in value negotiations makes it valuable in an instrumental way. Faculty of Philosophy University of Bucharest Bucharest, Romania lavimarin@yahoo.co.uk CHAPTER X SPIRITUAL COGNITION OF A PERSON AND CULTURE NIZHNIKOV SERGEY Abstract: Nowadays, humankind loses the character of its spiritual archetype; the person loses its humaneness. It is therefore necessary to reveal time-honored values with new force. These values form an integral part of all spiritual-cultural traditions of peoples that dwell on Earth. The spiritual archetype of humankind is unique, but it is formulated by different languages, cultures, symbols, concepts, and methods. Spiritual knowledge is defined in this case as deployment of the essence of a person that leads to a display of the spiritual archetype of humankind. The spiritual phenomenon is present only when there is a carrier – a spiritual person. In other words, without a concrete person there is no presence of the spiritual at all. It can be ciphered in cultures and in their texts but to decode it, to make it effective and alive, the person is called. Therefore the spiritual exists only there, and then, where it is existentially filled. Spiritual self-knowledge is possible only in such a seizure of the person, or transcendence in existential fullness at which personal essences are unpacked. Keywords: spiritual cognition, self-knowledge, transcendence, existence, spiritual archetype of humankind, symbol. Nowadays, there is much debate about the lack of spirituality in a society and in a person, but what is the spiritual as it is? You may hear the various answers to this question: someone sees the spiritual only in the sphere of religion or mysticism, someone else associates it with the whole area of culture or identifies it as morals. Especially frequent nowadays is the connection of the spiritual to any mystical visions or ideas, extrasensory or parapsychological abilities. The ordinary consciousness maintains the concept of spiritual1 in the individual interests. But what does its essence consist of? It is possible to answer this question in a more or less objective way if you rely on the analysis of the concept of the spiritual and on the 1 Gramatically speaking, it is generally agreed upon that spiritual is to be used as an adjective, while spirituality is the corresponding noun. However, considering the specificity of the Eastern theological thought, the author has deemed it necessary to use the former rather than the latter, as it embodies a particular, clearly delineated concept (Ed). 122 Nizhnikov Sergey history of its development, of the creation of the spiritual sphere as it is; then such a description will crystallize and shape the concept of spiritual. In order to clarify the problematic of spiritual it is necessary to already know something about it from the very beginning. Starting research, it is already necessary to know something about the subject, because we can investigate the unknown, but not the totally incomprehensible. The incomprehensible shows itself in the unknown, and by that, it allows us to ask some questions. The unknown concerns that about which it is possible to formulate a question, when something is already shown for a question, but remains rather inconceivable and demands deeper explorations, for expansion of thinking about itself. Such unknown objects are for us the concept of spiritual. The word spiritual has already been found. It reflects something about ourselves, but it was already found, only in vague and intuitive ways. It is still indistinct, but undoubtedly present in human life and makes it what it is. It is necessary to look closely so that the spiritual should become more clear. Having designated our unknown as spiritual, it is further necessary to reveal its characteristics as concepts which would be appropriate and would now give us the possibility to carry out theoretical research. Thus, we inevitably find ourselves within a limited circle, or a hermeneutical circle2, and only again and again passing around it and marking and outlining its borders, can we define the specifics of the spiritual phenomenon, its difference from anything else. And only after the spiritual field and its arrangement and its action are determined is it possible to move further to the center of the circle, getting deeper into the spiritual as it is. There are no doubts that such preliminary knowledge of the subject should inevitably be abstract, because it may become more concrete only as a result of complete and full research. Nevertheless, even this abstract knowledge should be essential enough that the object under investigation would never get out of sight, which should result in its more detailed and deeper description. Thus, for the analysis of the problem of spiritual it is necessary to have the initial definition of the characteristics of a spiritual phenomenon, and also of the sphere of its actions and reflections. If anything should develop, it is necessary that right at the beginning of the process it should comprise within itself the further becoming in the closed and undeveloped form. It is necessary to define right at the beginning of research an orientation of expansion of that which is curtailed. The concept itself represents a kind of such self-developing cell. By analogy, the definition of the concept of spiritual can be compared to the definition of the concept of philosophy and its subject. Nobody can ever give the exhaustive answer to this question as both philosophy and its subject are in constant becoming. The fullest answer can only be the history of philosophy itself, which proceeds constantly. It is the same with the 2 Gadamer H.-G. Truth and Method, translation by Joel Weinsheimer and Donald Marshall (New York: Continuum, 1989), pp. 291-293. Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 123 concept of spiritual, which will be described and filled up with content in the process of research; therefore it is not necessary to hasten with definitions. The present work as a whole is an experience of expansion of the concept of spiritual in all directions through the description of a spiritual problematic both from the point of view of the individual life of a person and from a social-cultural, historical one. However, we shall try to approach directly the clearing up of a spiritual phenomenon. First of all, it is not likely that anybody will challenge the fact that spiritual is closely connected to significance, especially with the most important part to any person – to the significance of his own life. This question stands in front of any person, regardless of his being a grain-grower or a philosopher, but not everyone thinks of it. And only when a person tries to pose this question himself can he make the step toward understanding the spiritual. The human being has an existence, but not always in the human image, and especially asking about the meaning of life clears up his own life for a person. All history of humankind's spiritual culture is endlessly asking for that purification and revealing of the essence of the human being in the world. However, a person poorly advanced in the spiritual-moral attitude could connect the meaning of life to sensual pleasure, to satisfaction of his extremely material, egoistic needs. But along with the growth of a person's sensibleness, intelligence grows as well, and so he begins the transition from material needs to spiritual ones, from satisfaction of egoistic inquiries to creativity for the benefit of other people and all humankind. SPIRITUAL AS SELF-KNOWLEDGE In the most intimate spiritual work, where the person is extremely honest with himself, he is capable of touching the depths of his own life, of meeting himself, sometimes for the first time is able to truly discover and know himself. Thus the spiritual self-knowledge is carried out, for such self-recognition brings simultaneous spiritual transformation of the person. Spiritual as a process represents itself in disclosing the essence of a person, and that is nothing else than self-cognition. In the act of selfknowledge a person is given to himself, but in a paradoxical way, so that he has a special essence that is in the dark concerning his own nature. Therefore the first precept appealed to a person from God, became a commandment \"know thyself.\" In history, it arises for the first time as an inscription on Apollonian temple in Delphi, then it is repeated by Thales, and it becomes the meaning of life for Socrates, getting into Plato's theory about knowledge as reminiscence of a complete kind. The same requirement is proclaimed in religion, though in the form specific to it, it also becomes the basic theme of art, especially in Aeschylus's tragedies in Ancient Greece, in Indian Bhagavad-Gita and even in Epos about Gilgamesh in ancient Mesopotamia. 124 Nizhnikov Sergey The spiritual phenomenon develops in a person, and this process can be named self-knowledge. Hegel characterized the given process in the following way: \"Know thyself.\" This absolute precept has no value, neither in itself, nor there where it was stated historically, as the self-cognition directed to certain abilities, character, propensities and weakness of an individual, but only the value of knowledge of that originally in the person, originally in itself and for itself, knowledge of the essence as spirit. In the philosophy of spirit so-called human-knowledge is of small value, aspiring to investigate in other people their features, their passions, and weaknesses – these as they are called, the bends of human heart – knowledge, on one hand, having the sense in case it can appraise the knowledge of general – a person as such and by that the essence – spirit and on the other hand – engaged in casual, insignificant, not original kinds of existence of spiritual, but not penetrating up to substantial – up to the spirit itself\"3. Resulting from the aforesaid, the spirit could be defined as the essence of spiritual. However, in distinction to Hegel, who has taken as a principle the philosophy of absolute idea and spirit as metaphysical categories, in the present work the object will be not spirit, but spiritual as it is reflected in human life: not so much about metaphysics, but mainly about a form of a human spiritual life. Certainly, metaphysics shows the quintessence of concept of spiritual in philosophical categories, but at the present stage of investigation the spread of scope plays a more important role. And from this point of view it is necessary not to metaphase the spiritual phenomenon, but to study how it is submitted in a human life and its spiritual products: philosophy, religion, and art. True philosophy is spiritual making, within the framework of it, and by it, self-knowledge is accomplished. Even the first naturalistic philosophers studied the universe to learn about themselves. Heraclites, even earlier than Socrates, in fact, was also engaged in self-knowledge, sitting on the steps of a temple, playing dice with children and reflecting on eternity. He, \"...as if having realized something majestic and important, speaks: \"I searched for myself\" – and from Delphian sayings considered, by most, divine: \"Know thyself,\" – that has served Socrates as a starting point, raising this question and his research...\" So wrote Plutarch about Heraclites.4 Socrates passes to a more direct self-knowledge; he is not interested anymore in roundabout ways to himself: \"I have refused research of objective reality,\" he said.5 Following Socrates, it is possible to say that spiritual knowledge is \"art which helps us to care for ourselves,\" that is to say, it is directed not toward that which belongs to us, but toward 3 G.V.F. Hegel, Encyclopedia of Philosophy Science, in 3 volumes. V. 3 (Мoscow, 1977), p. 6. 4 Abstracts of Earliest Greek Philosophers. p. 1 (Мoscow, 1989), p. 194. 5 Plato, Dialogues, 3 volumes, V. 1 (Мoscow, 1970), p. 70. Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 125 improvement of ourselves.6 As per Socrates, spiritual knowledge is directed as a search of the essence of human ego that later Plato has defined as the idea or the eidos of a person.7 The identification of idea with the essence of spiritual has resulted, then, in its understanding as metaphysic-supersensual; to avoid it in the given work, spiritual knowledge is defined as disclosing of essence of a person. Deep conformity can be found in Eastern philosophy. In Ancient Indian philosophy the spiritual purpose began to be determined by the concept moksha, or \"deliverance\" in translation from Sanskrit, and Mokshadharma – as a way of delivering the law and one of Mahabharata's books simultaneously. Mokshadharma, as well as the Upanishads, comprises the basic conceptual system and principles, that is, the archetype of Ancient Indian Culture. In Indian philosophy spiritual knowledge and the essence of a person are defined through transcendental-immanent understanding of Brahman-Atman. The same is said, for example, in Taoist book \"Guan In-Tzu \": \"to search for wisdom outside of itself – the height of nonsense,\" and the ancient Confucian philosopher Meng-tzu, said that \"the doctrine has only one purpose – search of lost human nature.\"8 The fundamental metaphysical categories of philosophy and basic religious symbols can be considered as conceptions of the essence of a person. Then also the category of being is a symbol of the essence of a person, because to it he is called to transcend from his existence, finding himself, thus, in a gleam of being (Heidegger). A person is an eternal way to himself, and for this purpose it is necessary for him to learn about all the universe as in the breadth of the heavens, and the depth of his own psyche, the logos of which is infinite in its self-increasing (Heraclites). And for this purpose he needs transcendence and immanence, being and empirical world, and such concepts as atom (Democritus), idea (Plato), \"the unmoved-mover\" (Aristotle), the supreme unity (Neoplatonist's The One, Vedanta, Vl. Solovyev) etc. They are, among other things, symbols of the essence of the person, points of a foothold for thought and self-creation. In spiritual knowledge a person finds a way to his essence. A person can be a slave not only to empirical circumstances, but also to ideas which are imposed on him by culture or ideology. Therefore, by researching the forms of spiritual and analyzing the concept, we clear the consciousness of illusions. The philosophical analysis of the spiritual is a way to freedom, in the process of self-purification and self-deliverance. In this sense philosophy, for example, is an esoteric science, accessible to everybody, but not comprehended by all. 6 Ibid., p. 49. 7 Plato, Collection of Compositions, 4 volumes, V. 1 (Мoscow, 1990), pp. 256, 733. 8 Anthology of the World Philosophy in 4 volumes. V.1. Part. 2 (Мoscow, 1969), p. 210. 126 Nizhnikov Sergey SPIRITUAL AND CULTURE Spiritual penetrates all spheres of human activities. Without the spiritual a person does not exist at all, but there can be various levels of spiritualization. In connection to this we shall consider reflections of spiritual phenomenon in culture, mysticism, and morals. The experience of spiritual self-cognition that creates the essence of a person also creates a culture. It is the form-building core; we shall recollect confessions of St. Augustine, Rousseau, and Leo Tolstoy: they are not only the reflection of revolution in culture, but in many respects have also served as its catalyst. In the cultural history of mankind, the spiritual experience of knowledge is seen as Revelation, – a Tree with three branches: religion, philosophy, and art. They are united by the phenomenon of spiritual that, however, is materialized in these three spheres in a specific way, based on various intrinsic forces of the person, his abilities, and his potential. Strictly speaking, the phenomenon of spiritual is not the property of culture in the sense that it arises on the basis of spiritual acts. From nothingness strings of being are weaved, from spiritual the cultural is created, its cloth is weaved. In culture, the movement of spiritual is objectified. Culture alone is capable of preventing the degradation of a person down to a barbaric condition, and even that is not always within its power. A person who has tasted the spiritual always stays in opposition to prevailing representations, whether he is a philosopher or a religious reformer, an art worker or a spiritual mystic. Culture lives on spiritual acts, without which culture would be incomprehensible and useless. But, after having become set as congealed and objectified knowledge, culture can become hostile to any appearance of really spiritual creativity which frequently destroys the established traditions and outlooks. However, at the same time there is also a way back from spirituality objectified in culture toward spiritual. Nietzsche is the brightest representative of a struggler with a culture, with congealed spiritual values. He struggled alone, face-to-face against all the might of a long-established thousand-year stubborn culture, but, eventually, its pressure destroyed him. Gains of spirit are not given to a person as a gift; for that he pays in blood, for spiritual creativity is always a revelation. F.M. Dostoevsky has shown the animosities of culture to any real display of spiritual very well in the novel the \"Brothers Karamazov\" (the legend about the great inquisitor) where the congealed religious image became more important than its direct appearance. Spiritual is always unknown, and demands from a person his total selfrebellion, risk, and struggle. SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE AND MORAL The phenomenon of spiritual, when implemented as a process of selfcognition, during which the essence of a person is developed, finds itself in Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 127 the increasing degree of the humanizing of the person. The basic moral precepts are born as revelations in the deep experience of self-knowledge. And this means that spiritual knowledge is directly connected to morals. Spiritual knowledge develops the humanity in a person, because in fact it can come to light only in its own existence. \"The humanity of a person,\" wrote Heidegger about this, \"is based in his essence.\" And further: \"nonhumane,\" is someone \"not humanistic\" (we name the person, – S.N.)...that has broken away from his essence.\"9 From this it is possible to conclude that a person in his essence, by his spiritual nature is good-natured and that he becomes malicious only when he forgets himself, keeping away from his essence. Out of such oblivion grows the spiritual crisis of humankind as the loss of humanity by a person, the loss of humanism, the loss of his own countenance. \"It starts to seem that to the person that now only he appears everywhere,\" writes further Heidegger. \"Meanwhile actually with itself, i.e., with the essence, the person does not appear anywhere.\" His essence is hidden both by technique and by his own not-spiritualized sensuality. From spiritual knowledge also grows true humanism, which is the intrinsic characteristic of the spiritual phenomenon. Heidegger, examining ontological roots of humanism, thinks of it as \"humanity of a human being from affinity to being.\" In spiritual creativity the person finds freedom and dignity. Spiritual acts require senses and real values, social and juridical rules, morals. A person being of an extremely versatile essence is nevertheless compelled to make his way to integrity of spiritual knowledge through absolutization of one of his intrinsic forces. As a result, various spheres of demonstration of spiritual appear that, despite of their intrinsic unity, enter in inconsistent mutual relation: reason may be opposed to belief, to mind – to feeling, but these contradictions stimulate spiritual development, conduct humankind along the way of creation of the complete person. Frequently in ordinary consciousness spiritual is identified with ethics and moral norms that do not correspond to the truth. It is already determined that spiritual knowledge is expressed in the disclosing of the essence of a person; the outcome of that is finding humanity. Then morals are essentially connected to spiritual and are one of the forms of its display. Morals are moral only when born from the depths of spiritual, instead of being postulated from the outside and prevailing over a person. Morals having the basis of spiritual are centered not so much on the law, but mostly on blessedness, which itself forms the laws. Spiritual love is the supreme legislator and includes in itself a duty. The basic moral precepts have been born as revelations within the depth of self-cognition experience, regardless of the basis on which it was grounded. So, for example, a precept \"Don't kill!\" has been known for thousands of years, but wars proceed on Earth, and the state laws of many 9 Problems of a Person in Western Philosophy (Мoscow, 1988), pp. 318319. 128 Nizhnikov Sergey countries include a death sentence in its codes. All this speaks of a spiritual level that does not understand that life of any person is beyond any price, and nobody has the moral right to take it away. It is not understood that evil can not overcome the evil, but only goodness is capable of transforming it. Leo Tolstoy with his sermon of nonresistance to harm by violence was not understood even in the homeland, and Mahatma Ghandi was killed by people to whom he had devoted his life. The presence of murders on Earth, regardless of whatever \"plausible excuse\" it is based upon, means that humankind has not yet entered a spiritual phase of its development. SPIRITUAL AND MYSTICISM After analyzing some intrinsic characteristics of a spiritual phenomenon and defining its displays, for the sake of clarity, we shall also define what is not spiritual and what it is frequently identified with by ordinary consciousness. Let's move further to the analysis of mysticism and its relations to the phenomenon of spiritual, for in ordinary consciousness it is the most confusing question. Especially during the years of changes, when consciousness is no longer tied to the old ideology, huge numbers of all possible kinds of psychics, parapsychologists, sorcerers, and preachers come to the surface of public consciousness, many of whom characterize their activity as spiritual. On the other hand, many serious people place mysticism entirely into the area of imaginations and superstitions. Therefore, first of all, it is necessary to define the term. In translation from ancient Greek, \"mystical\" means \"mysterious.\" This term characterizes, probably, the position of a person in the world, that any knowledge expands the sphere of unknown. The essence of a person and its world existence have their roots in this mysteriousness, being unknown and even incomprehensible, and there is nothing unnatural in it. Mysticism always turns to mysterious, always looks with skepticism at what is already obtained by reason, and this stimulates a person to search his new cognition and earlier unknown areas. New types of cultures and knowledge arise in an intuitive sphere and within a mystical frame, and then slowly transform into a certain rationality and completeness of forms. Heraclites and Pythagoras were closely connected to priests and all sorts of diviners; originally the archetype of Christianities had been developed in the mystical philosophy of Philo Judaeus (Alexandrian), Origen, St. Gregory of Nyssa, and Maximus the Confessor; in Meister Eckhart's mysticism and then Jakob Boehme, it has served as the catalyst of thought for German classical philosophy. Thus, it is clear that within a mystical shell acts the spiritual itself, though not in a clear shape yet, but intuitively, because it is not yet illuminated by enlightening of consciousness. Eventually, the mystical is a root of religious views, said Ibn Sīnā (Avicenna). Philosophical metaphysical categories also contain it in themselves, many of them more postulated than proved. Mysticism in a positive sense is a constant openness of a person to the unknown; constant Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 129 inquiring and searching. Presence and realization of a spiritual phenomenon here are again available. But mysticism can also have other meanings; it can be understood as extrasensory perception and parapsychology, or simply as some concept that designs other levels of reality. And the matter is not that all these are products of imagination; they can probably just as well exist. But the essence of the affair is that all this has no relation to spiritual. In this case, mysticism represents only the expansion of an usual way of human knowledge, but in unconventional areas for modern culture. The crux is that the spiritual knowledge is not characterized by expansion in breadth; it qualitatively differs from all other methods of knowledge as it spreads itself into the depth. While scientific and extrasensory perception of any kind is distributed horizontally, though in different directions, the spiritual acts in relation to them as knowledge are vertical, not only as knowledge that relates to the abilities of a person and his properties and their development, but also as knowledge concerning its owner, knowledge of essence, ego, and human nature. The spiritual person is not anxious about the development of his abilities and expansion of the horizon of his knowledge, but he is anxious about the detection of his essence or perfection of his nature, or moral purification. He is interested in, first of all, how to dispose of that he already has in the proper way. SPIRITUAL ANTHROPOLOGY The aforesaid understanding of spiritual does not coincide with the anthropology of L. Feuerbach. The latter reduced all understanding of spiritual to love, and mostly sensual, rather than spiritual. In the pathos of bringing the transcendental down to earth, he has missed the essence of the person disclosing itself through the process of transcendence, without which the birth of spiritual is impossible. Love, as the strongest and the deepest experience, regardless of the object toward which it is directed, already comprises in itself elements of transcendence, self-rebellion, and spreading beyond its limits. For this reason Descartes said: \"the concept of God precedes me.\"10 This short phrase contains more wisdom than in all directly anthropological representations. Through the given statement, the philosopher probably wanted to say that a person is born spiritually from the supreme idea, from the original pattern of transcendence, instead of a monkey. \"The pure concept,\" explains Descartes in another place, \"is there is a God.\"11 Only relying on such high concepts is a person capable of accomplishing spiritual cognition, which creates his essence. Through them, a person pulls himself out of an animal life, same as Munchausen – out of a bog. In this sense, a person has his origin from God, or from human being, depending on what conceptual system he selects. As to the 10 R. Descartes. Selected Works (Мoscow, 1950), p. 363. 11 A.J. Lyatker, Descartes (Мoscow, 1974), p. 184. 130 Nizhnikov Sergey traditional anthropology, Heidegger remarked that it \"is such interpretation of the person which basically already knows what he is; consequently it is never possible to ask a question as to what creature he is.\"12 However, despite everything that has been said, spiritual knowledge as constructing the essence of a person, or developing it, should be studied under the name of the object, such as, anthropology, science about a person; in this case, it is possible to express it as \"spiritual anthropology.\" The latter should not evaluate a person as something that is constant once and forever, and not as a static concept. Even when a person thinks about himself and defines himself through a pronoun I, I is no more than a symbol of infinite depth, and I is only its name. The essence of a person is not something static; the creative person is capable each day of recognizing himself as something else. The essence of a person is developed during the spiritual self-cognition leading a person in his infinite way to the Person, to perfection, and to an ideal that is to open the spiritual archetype of humankind to the full volume. This process by itself is the supreme kind of spiritual creativity and creation where a person creates not something alien to itself, or something auxiliary for his existence, but his very essence. Up until now we have established that the concept of spiritual as different from all others, and, having made this work, we inevitably gave birth to a word. Heidegger remarks, that \"everything that occurs in the 'logos,' is the task of 'sofia,' or philosophers.\"13 Thus, a vicious circle appears: if we try to address the problem of spiritual without depending on religion, philosophy, and other spheres, and start to allocate it as independent, it becomes impossible to avoid logos and sofia; and if the love for an object of research is initially present, then all characteristics of philosophy are intact. It seems to be ineradicable. It happens that exactly those who break the established stereotypes and opinions about philosophy are the true philosophers. That is exactly what happened with Pascal and Kierkegaard, with Camus and Kafka. Then the true philosophy appears as meta-philosophizing, for which there are no borders. Then the analysis of the problem of spiritual becomes an attempt to catch all its intrinsic displays in logos, and these displays are not limited by the sphere of traditional philosophy, but they comprise both ancient mysteries and the newest scientific research about the person. The ideal of Eastern Christian anthropology can be expressed through the concept of theology14 (coming from Greek.  – theosis) that is 12 M. Heidegger, Metaphysics – What is it? (Мoscow: 1986), p. 117. 13 M. Heidegger, Main Concepts of Metaphysics // Journal «Questions of Philosophy», No 7, 1989, p. 136. 14 Concerning this thematic see the following materials: Illarion (Alfeev), Hierom Saint Simeon New Theologian and Orthodox Tradition (Мoscow: 1998); Illarion (Alfeev), Hierom Life and Doctrine of Saint George Theologian (Мoscow: 1998); Macarius Egyptian (the Great), Spiritual Talks of Saint Trinity Sergio Monastery (1994); Mythical Theology, Kiev, \"Way to the Truth\" Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 131 characterized by the ecstatic experience of direct uniting with Absolute. Though a historical analogue and prototype of deification can be distinguished in ancient times in shaman – orgies cults, that aimed at removing distance between a man and the Gods (world of spirits), nevertheless deification in the true sense of the word appears only when spiritual cognition comes to the concept of transcendental Personality – personalized theism. Deification is not just \"moral\" unity and utmost limit of human perfection, but it is an ontological one. At the same time it does not mean unity with God; that is impossible in personalized theistic traditions of a transcendental type. According to these traditions, a problem appears: What is a way to bring together an ontological character of a man's deification and transcendental incomprehensibility of God? The source of the deification of a man is not his deity essence (Nature) but a grace, Godblessing energy. Grace of Spirit differs, but it is not separated from essence. Thus, the divine presence becomes possible regardless of the absolute transcendence of God. Present basic postulates that characterize deification were approved by Constantinople councils of 1341 and 1351, and that was connected with the activity of St. Gregory Palamas (1296-1359). In Russia, Hesychastic ideas of deification developed in the creations and lives of St. Sergius of Radonezh (ок. 1315-92), Nil Sorsky (St. Nilus of Sora, 14331508), Blessed Paisius Velichkovsky (1722-1794), Seraphim of Sarov (1760-1833), the Optina Monastery Elders (startzy), Joann Kronstadtsky - (1829-1909), and others. Deification is directed to the transformation of a man as a biological specimen into a man as a spiritual creature; it does not diminish or destroy humanity but enriches it. (J. Meyendorff). It is realized through transcendence of real existence and it means a break to being and reason, on the basis of religious-existential experience (death, depravity, penitence, cry, blessing, and love). At the same time, not only the identity (personality) of a man remains, but a fundamental self-cognition occurs that leads to deployment of man's essence and revelation of a spiritual archetype of humankind. Theosis in this connection means orthodoxy and not absorption of a creature being (V.N. Losskiy). Deification not only keeps a man personality intact (holism), but for the first time at the ontological level establishes it; not only a soul is glorified but also a body. Thus, the deification doctrine expresses the anthropological ideal of Eastern (1991); Gregory Palamas, Triodes for Protection of Saint-Mutes (Мoscow: Canon, 1995); I.V. Popov, Idea of Divinity in Ancient Eastern Church (1909); Saint Simeon New Theologian, The Deity Anthem, (Sergiev Posad, 1989); Kiprian (Kern), Archimandrite, Anthropology of St Gregory Palamas (Мoscow: «Palmer», 1996); G.V. Florovsky, Gregory Palamas and Divinity // Dogma and History (Мoscow: 1998), pp. 386-393; S.S. Horougiy, To Phenomenology of Austerity (Мoscow: 1998); N. Russell, The Concept of Deification in the Early Greek Fathers, Ph.D. thesis (Oxford: 1988) 132 Nizhnikov Sergey Christianity which, to some extent, was a foothold for Russian philosophy that, contrary to Kant and Hume, established I substantiality as a metaphysic of faith; personalization in contrast to Hegel; spiritual origin of a personality as different from L. Feuerbach. The spiritual phenomenon can also be defined through the concept of transformation. Spiritual is carried out when a certain essence is transformed into the Person. Furthermore, this process can acquire its own symbolism and terminology, depending on what material is accomplished: religious, philosophical, or other creative materials. But in its essence the spiritual act is only spiritual, and then it is objectified in other certain areas and disciplines. When asking a question about spiritual, we inevitably find ourselves in the bosom of thousand-year cultural traditions. For spiritual knowledge, a person requires some levers which would enable him to release him from himself. Here we inevitably enter the three mentioned spheres; each of them has the language in which and by means of which spiritual knowledge is gained, the results of which are fixed in the same language, and on which it is carried out. Certain methods of spiritual knowledge have developed appropriate to specifics of spheres of its realization: philosophizing on the basis of thinking, religious belief on the basis of ability of the person to access the supreme feelings. According to young K. Marks, \"the originality of each intrinsic force\"15 of a person creates \"the original way of its objectification.\" The disclosing of a united process of spiritual knowledge disintegrates and shows results in different areas, and through these channels it allows a person to create himself. The phenomenon of spiritual cannot be turned off from its manifestations as being from living, but it is also impossible to reduce it to them. Spiritual only shows itself in an image; only then it can be seen by a person, but any image disguises spiritual as such. \"Jesus said: Images appear to the person, and the light in them is shadowed. In the image of the father's light, the light will be disclosed, and the image of the father will be shadowed by the light.\"16 Identifying images of spiritual with the spirit itself, the person limits himself and, thus, deforms his own essence, running into narrow dogmatism and fanaticism. However, living in the world of alienation, in the world of spiritual the person is also compelled to move by way of trial and error. We say that the spiritual exists, is, but it is nothing like any other thing in the common world. Spiritual is boundless both in breadth and in depth, but only manifests itself concretely. A person cannot cognize himself directly, for that would contradict his position in the world; he should either eliminate his consciousness or become God. He is capable to cognize himself only indirectly, through displays of the essence and its symbols. And since the spiritual essence basically can't be objectified, it is possible to cognize it only in its existence. The cognition of spiritual can be carried 15 K. Marks, F. Engels, Early Works (Moscow: 1956), p. 593. 16 See Thomas' Gospel. Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 133 out only through its available products. A less direct way can turn out to be the easiest way, as a roundabout road uphill is easier to take than climbing it straight. Therefore everything that is created in culture is a mediated path to spiritual. And each person chooses an appropriate way that appeals to him and to his essence. It is impossible to say that A. Pushkin's aesthetic creativity was not the spiritual way, compared to St. Seraphim of Sarov's prayer.17 For the writer or the poet, his artistic activity is the spiritual creativity, the appropriate method of disclosing his essence. From this point of view it is probably difficult to allocate what has most importance and priority, religion or philosophy, art creativity or, for example, music. The concrete personal approach is necessary here, the criterion of which is the depth of disclosing his essence. Spiritual knowledge is revelation that splits into three basic spheres, but forms a unity, nevertheless. Philosophy, religion, and art as specific ways of displaying the spiritual do not only contradict each other, but also communicate and interact with each other in the entire culture of mankind. CONCLUSIONS Therefore, some intrinsic characteristics of the spiritual phenomenon are already determined, the spheres of its actions and objectivities allocated. When talking about the definition of the concept of spiritual, it is impossible to stop at any of the pre-established points of view, for example, extremely religious or atheistic; it would deform the concept of spiritual as this would only be a one-sided consideration of it. In the modern world we notice every possible, and sometimes opposite, type of world view. The task is that their carriers must find a common language, and, moreover, the general spiritual basis for dialogue. Therefore this work attempts an allround analysis of a spiritual phenomenon and through its displays it attempts to create a complete and intrinsic representation about it. But it is equally necessary to find some starting point of research, and it is already determined: spiritual is examined as the process of uncovering the person's essence. The basis of this analysis is the position of a person in the world, a position in which he discovers himself in the act of consciousness. He discovers himself as essence, which inside him contains contradictions and moves among them. The essence of them is that the person is as if crucified between two worlds: empirical and theoretical, sensual and speculative; he is simultaneously spiritual and material essence. This position of a person in the world is reflected by religion in the basic doctrines and by philosophy in categories: through the symbol of the fall from grace and a category of being or essence. Disclosing of religious symbolism and philosophical categorical apparatus is the answer, in the attempt of making judgments and 17 A.S. Pushkin is a great Russian writer, while Seraphim of Sarov is a famous saint of the Russian Orthodox Church. They lived at the same time at the beginning of the 19th century. 134 Nizhnikov Sergey in the feeling of overcoming the contradictions of the human position in the world. There are concepts of ideal and material, goodness and maliciousness, etc. The concept of spiritual in this case is considered not as a category that is counter material, and not as some absolute that would have removed in itself matter and spirit, but as the highest level of intelligence, sensibleness by a person of his position in the world, his being and his essence. The spiritual truth is nothing else than true and correct, agreeable to the attitude of a person to himself and the world. \"Truth that,\" wrote Kafka, \"is necessary for each person for life; nevertheless, he can not receive or get that from anybody. Each person continuously should give rise to it from itself, otherwise he will be lost. Life without truth is impossible. It can be said that the truth is the very life.\"18 Originally, the spiritual existed for a person as such a mystery in which he must lose himself, enter some kind of ecstasy, the changed condition of consciousness, thus accomplishing thus some transcendence of his routine existence. But all this occurred mostly due to the elimination of conscious life, rather than due to the increase of sensibleness. However, a person needed some way of transcendence, because even now, having come to a deadlock, he can choose as a remedy alcohol, drugs, or various mystical illusions. Qualitatively a new understanding of spiritual and a method of its achievement has appeared along with the occurrence of philosophy and monotheistic religions. The spiritual attitude toward life began to appear, where a person began to comprehend life metaphysically from his position in the world. Based on such judgment the representation of Plato's idea was born; the idea about the ideal relation to life, that is, the spiritual, appeared. The idea as a spiritual vision is expressed most adequately, though not without some problems, in Plato's philosophy. In religion the metaphysical comprehension of life is fixed on its central symbol. Through such a symbol or idea for human consciousness arises the possibility of an entry into spiritual and it is the realization by a person of his spiritual life. Christ, Buddha, and Plato have managed to penetrate into the spiritual essence of a person's position in the world and to express it in symbols and concepts. Their positions contain a speculative truth which is demonstrated in the materials of various cultures and through various methods. And as spiritual knowledge concerns neither the abilities of a person nor what he has, but what he is in his essence, the spiritual truth is he himself on the highest level of sensibleness of his being, once the essence is completely developed, resulting in the appearance of the spiritual archetype of humankind. For this reason Christ said \"I am the way,\" and alHallaj, \"I am the Truth.\" Spiritual results from the position of a person in the world, which is characterized by such concepts as freedom, will, consciousness, speculation, etc. From the realization of spiritual cognition and from its 18 F. Kafka, Castle. Stories and Legends // Letter to Dad (Мoscow: 1991), p. 568. Spiritual Cognition of a Person and Culture 135 consideration here and now arise such concepts as existence and transcendence, which essentially characterize a phenomenon of spiritual. The necessity of spiritual comes from the position of a person in the world that is characterized by duality and contradictions: a human person by nature is a biological creature, and by essence, spiritual, but a person is a unity and integrity of everything he has. He enters the sphere of spiritual or essentially human area when he starts posing existential questions about the significance of his own life. Spiritual is represented as truth of human life, which is born from comprehension of the life itself. Spiritual is the supreme product of life as it is, which comes to the self-consciousness and conscious increasing in the person. Searching for the meaning of life results in the necessity of self-knowledge, the essence of being. Spiritual cognition is a vertical path whereas all other kinds of knowledge are distributed in a horizontal plane. This vertical path, or the intrinsic cognition of the meaning of life, is nothing else but self-cognition, as a result of which the essence of the person is developed and created, showing the spiritual archetype of humankind. The self-cognition as knowledge of the cognizing subject is speculation about his essence, as a result of which it comes to the increasing appearance that, in its turn, is characterized by the humanizing of a person, results in his complete humanization. Such knowledge is the supreme kind of creativity: self-mastery. In an ideally achieved spiritual perfection it is possible to count in the one who has developed his essence, has humanized himself, and has opened in himself the spiritual archetype of humankind. The process of spiritual creativity in a history of culture splits into three basic streams in which spiritual proves the most direct image: religion, philosophy, and art. Spiritual as it is, is the unity in its concept, but during historical periods it is carried out in various ways. It is transformation of a person into a spiritual creature which would be impossible without \"points of support,\" symbols of religion and metaphysical categories of philosophy, based on which the consciousness is capable of purifying itself. Spiritual penetrates all human life activity and without it in general there is no person, though in other spheres its activity is submitted only indirectly. However, to its self-consciousness spiritual can come, if it is inquiring not about something else, but about it itself, not about its spheres, even some directly objectified, but about spiritual as initial revelation, as contemplation in which all intrinsic forces of a person result in supreme harmony, and as perfection when the essence of a person is completely realized in its existence, history, and culture. Peoples Friendship University of Russia Moscow, Russia nizhnikovs@mail.ru\n\nCHAPTER XI THE ENDS OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE CONTEXT OF CONTEMPORARY BIOPOLITICS CRISTIAN IFTODE Abstract: The purpose of this study is to propose and endorse a specific answer to the question regarding the ends of philosophy in the context of today's culture. After a series of general remarks about the baffling landscape of twentieth century philosophy, I will suggest that we could regard the radical critique of modern subjectivity as being a guiding thread for the understanding of all the relevant issues in contemporary (postNietzschean) philosophy, as well as for the understanding of the way philosophers have been relating to what they were doing. Nevertheless, I shall argue that a very important philosophical and cultural phenomenon can be noticed in the West since the beginning of the 1980s: the death of the \"death of the subject\" and the practical turn in contemporary philosophy. More than this, I will hold that it is this return of the subject, nowadays, as an action subject (at the same time, a principle of practical reflexivity and the result of a process of subjectivation), rather than an epistemic one, that favors a rebirth of philosophy in its inaugural concept of \"way of life\" and \"care of the self.\" After pointing out three levels of resistance to the idea of philosophy as a practice (or set of practices) aimed to perform an effective transformation of its subject (the prevailing socio-cultural context, so favorable to the idea of self-acceptance; the tradition of modern moral philosophy, bracketing the very meaning of ethics as an \"ascetic\" work whose goal is the self-fashioning of the individual; some of the influential trends in the field of contemporary moral psychology), I will speak about three aporias that illustrate this \"form of life\" that is philosophy and also define the \"condition\" of any philosopher: (a) disinterested contemplation vs. existential practice; (b) Socratic-Nietzschean unsettlement vs. full embrace of a philosophy of life; (c) self-creation vs. self-discovery. In the end, I shall emphasize the present ethical and political relevance of the practice of philosophy, both on a personal or rather interpersonal level (with the goal of self-transformation) and on a public level (with the task of consistently critically approaching all forms of disciplinary power). Keywords: self, subject authenticity, Foucault, philosophy as practice, self-fashioning. 138 Cristian Iftode The Contemporary Landscape of Philosophy: The Distinction between \"Analytic\" and \"Continental\" Philosophy What is the meaning and purpose of philosophy in the context of today's culture? There is most likely no other discipline whose tradition could match that of philosophy. In fact, any person having a medium degree of education is probably aware of the following situation: it is in the realm of philosophy that most of the disciplines constituting the \"educational offer\" of a university nowadays first came into being as specific ways of interrogation. But it is also true that there is no other discipline today that offers, at least at first sight, the impression of such a fragmentation, dispersion, irreducible plurality of approaches, methods, research programs, and \"objectives,\" as contemporary philosophy does. The \"mental cramp\" – to make use of a Wittgensteinian expression – that any given fresh graduate student in Philosophy would experience if asked to produce one of those fashionable presentations \"in a nutshell\" on the topic Contemporary Philosophy, has to do, I believe, with something more than an education urging him or her to be extremely cautious with any quick generalization: it is the expression of a fundamental difficulty, if not a sheer impossibility. It is not only about assessing an unavoidable hermeneutical circle that constrains us to realize any historical or thematic presentation of philosophy from a particular philosophical perspective; it is also about how many aspects or elements of the contemporary landscape our graduate student would feel he has to leave aside or be silent about. There is no doubt that philosophy has presumed since its early beginnings opposite schools, that it has lived and fed from polemics, quarrels, mutual criticisms of the most bitter kind between its \"followers.\" But we could state that what has happened in the twentieth century brings the traditional polyphony of philosophical discourse toward a worrisome scattering. To paraphrase a Nietzschean saying, not only do we know today less than ever what a good philosophy book should look like; we are not at all sure about the philosopher's role, purpose, or task in the public space. It is no accident that this kind of major uncertainty about the ends of philosophy is reflected in the social environment, making hard to reject an embarrassing remark such as the following, quoted from one of P. Raabe's books on philosophical counseling: if we were to analyze the job opportunities that the graduate students in philosophy have outside universities and research institutes, we would be forced to conclude that \"academic philosophers give birth to children who must live in other people's houses in order to survive.\"1 It is true that, in order to get a better orientation in the complicated landscape of twentieth century philosophy, we are usually referred to a strongly \"ideologized\" distinction: that between \"analytic\" and \"continental\" philosophers. The English philosopher B. Williams once 1 P. Raabe, Issues in Philosophical Counseling (London: Greenwood Publishing, 2002), p. 4. The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 139 convincingly argued that \"the distinction rests upon a confusion of geographical and methodological terms, as if one were to classify cars into front-wheel drive and Japanese.\"2 Also, K. Mulligan openly admitted that, \"in numerous ways, continental philosophy is an Anglo-American creation.\"3 Most of the times the \"analytics\" use this expression, they refer to a \"nosology of thought\" (D. Stove), that is a (hopefully) complete inventory of ill or bad forms of doing philosophy, away from the \"canon\" of the exact sciences. But even if we were to assume (which may prove extremely unwise) that \"analytic\" philosophy is something unitary, supposing a powerfully individualized way of philosophizing, specific conceptual tools, and a clearly defined research program, it will be almost impossible for us to make any order (let alone subsuming all the visions to any common \"denominator\") out of the troubled landscape of so many different trends and orientations in contemporary philosophy, such as phenomenology, hermeneutics, existentialism, neo-Marxism, personalism, structuralism and post-structuralism, \"debolism,\" deconstruction, critical theory, neo-pragmatism, and so on. There is yet another particular circumstance that could definitively block our graduate student trying to produce that overview of twentieth century philosophy I mentioned earlier. There is surely no other field apart from philosophy in which so many notable figures have made careers by announcing, loud and clear, its death. All these successive \"deaths\" of philosophy would no doubt deserve an independent study. But what interests me now is the complicity between this kind of discourse and the compelling announcement of yet another illustrious death: the death of the subject. The Radical Critique of Modern Subjectivity: A Major Theme in Twentieth Century Philosophy We all know that \"the death of the Author\" represented a real obsession for contemporary literary theory and a trademark of structuralist approaches; nevertheless, from a philosophical point of view, such a theme should be regarded as an echo or an \"application\" of the radical critique of modern subjectivity, an essential motif for contemporary (post-Nietzschean) philosophy, at least on the \"continent.\" We could argue that for someone interested in finding a key, a guiding thread that would allow him or her to grasp, at least to some degree, the inner logic of the polymorphous spectrum of philosophical debates in the last century or so, the critique of the subject (in fact, of the entire modern philosophy denounced as being 2 A clear presentation of Williams's point of view is to be found in S. Critchley, Continental Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford University Press, 2001), pp. 32-34. 3 K. Mulligan, \"C'était quoi la philosophie dite «continentale» ?\", in Un siècle de philosophie.1900-2000 (Collectif) (Paris: Gallimard, 2000), p. 334. 140 Cristian Iftode grounded on a \"metaphysics of the subject\") appears not only as one of the main themes, but also as a horizon of understanding for all the relevant philosophical issues, as well as for the way philosophers have been relating to what they were doing, to the nature of philosophy, its relevance, its purpose or its lack of \"practical\" purpose. The critique of the modern subject, generically identified (yet often in extreme haste) with the Cartesian cogito, a subject understood as a center of experience and action, endowed with the attribute of reflexivity (self-consciousness) and, thus, capable of self-determination, is, in a sense, \"the mark of destiny\" for our late modernity (or \"postmodernity,\" if the term is not somehow imprudent). Moreover, it doesn't seem unwise to point out the correspondence between this radical, generalized critique of the \"subject\" in all its shapes and forms (the contemporary anti-humanism being only a dimension of this critique), so popular in the \"continental\" tradition, and the \"reductionist\" way, to use D. Parfit's word, to deal with the problem of personal identity, embraced by most of the analytic philosophers. The Death of the \"Death of the Subject\" and the \"Practical\" Turn in Contemporary Philosophy. The New Action Subject: A Principle of Practical Reflexivity. Philosophy as a Way of Life. Conflicting Metaphilosophical Views: Applied Philosophy Versus Practical Philosophy Without going any further with the presentation of this generalized critique of the subject, I would like, to draw attention to a very important philosophical and cultural phenomenon that can be noticed in the West since the beginning of the 1980s. To put it briefly and a bit theatrically, I am speaking about the death of the \"death of the subject.\" We notice in the last decades more and more approaches claiming \"the return of the subject,\" the rethinking of the concept of subjectivity, or even the resettlement of the subject in that central position of knowledge and action so strongly challenged since the end of the nineteenth century.4 And yet, I believe we are not fully grasping the historical challenge that all these approaches suppose, as long as we perceive them as being nothing more than attempts to restore a naïve conception about subjectivity (one that identifies \"subject\" 4 \"So it seems that this subject, which the moderns had tried to propose as its own foundation and also that of the real, is now broken. Having become, from now on, opaque for its own gaze, knowing itself thrown into a world that it doesn't constitute, how could it still remain, at the end of the various upheavals whose object it was, a subject for philosophical interrogation? And yet, paradoxically, perhaps the debate around subjectivity has never been more alive as it is in the different traditions of thought that structure world thinking today,\" A. Renaut, Découvrir la philosophie: Le sujet (Paris: Odile Jacob, 2010), pp. 31-32. The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 141 with \"consciousness\"),5 or a notion of subject elaborated in modern philosophy (whether we are referring to the Cartesian cogito, the Leibnizian monad, or the transcendental subject of Kant). The subject that seems to return, nowadays, is an action subject, rather than an epistemic one;6 it is not a transcendental position, but a principle of practical reflexivity; it is neither an \"originary auto-affection\" nor merely a discursive function (as in post-modern approaches), but the result of a process of subjectivation. I will make another strong assumption: it is this death of \"the death of the subject\" that favors a rebirth of philosophy in its inaugural concept of \"way of life\" and \"care of the self.\" And yet, in order to avoid a primary misunderstanding of these old desiderata, a considerable effort might be required, an effort to conceive the nature of philosophy in a significantly different manner than the one currently propagated in universities and engraved on the minds of the public. What I mean is that we are accustomed to regard philosophy as a body of theories having possible applications. But what if we tried to see philosophy as a kind of practice in itself or, even better, as a set of social practices, most of which have, of course, an eminently discursive or dialogical character?7 What I have in 5 \"It is not about exploiting, for instance, the conscience of a loss that we all feel, more or less, when confronted by the tyranny of Mass Media or publicity or by the phenomena of cultural conditioning, in order to simply reestablish, in its old form, the theme of subjectivity (...); we rightfully exclude the idea of an unproblematic return to the perspective of a self-transparent subject, sovereign author of all of its acts\" (ibidem, p. 34). 6 The hypothesis I am embracing rests also upon this fact, stated by Renaut: it is in the field of moral and political reflection that contemporary philosophy explicitly attested its impossibility to abandon the theme of the subject. Regarding the former, it will be sufficient to remember the impossibility of understanding \"moral experience without understanding ourselves as being responsible for our actions,\" which obviously refers to \"a 'self' capable of answering to another as well as to its own conscience\" for its deeds, and thus to a moral subject (ibidem, p. 34). As to the political philosophy of our times, it is interesting to notice that we are witnessing, in the following of the Heideggerian reading of modern metaphysics, \"the condemnation of a founding subjectivity as being the distant root of totalitarian or technocratic subjection,\" since this kind of denouncement makes sense only by appeal to \"a particular idea of the human being as one to whom, in an enslaved world, is denied any opportunity and any right of being the fundament of its own thoughts and actions; in short: of being a subject and not only an object, reified bearer of an endless manipulation\" (ibidem, p. 33). 7 \"What is philosophy when rather than as merely logos, one wants to think of it as ergon? ... For philosophy to find its reality it must be practice (both in the singular and plural, a practice and practices); the reality of philosophy is found in its practices,\" stated Foucault in his 1983 course at Collège de France, while commenting on Plato's Seventh Letter, see M. 142 Cristian Iftode mind are two conflicting representations about the distinctive mark of philosophy, or even two competing metaphilosophical views: according to the one I am now endorsing, \"practical philosophy\" is a very different thing from \"applied philosophy,\" while the famous dichotomy between theoretical and practical philosophy seems to become rather irrelevant. This change of perspective regarding philosophical activity is then decisive in order to have a right evaluation of the strictly philosophical purpose that the so-called \"techniques of the self\" suppose (or, if we are to use the traditional expression, prone nowadays to unfortunate misunderstandings, the \"spiritual exercises,\" involving various techniques of concentration, meditation, increasing attention, etc., developed and transmitted in the field of philosophy since its historical beginnings). I am referring to exercises of thought (in a very generic sense) aimed to produce a determined ethical effect: performing an effective transformation in the \"being\" itself of the one who philosophizes, in his or her way of living, of relating to the world, to people and to himself or herself; curing illusions and freeing from prejudices; strengthening the mind and the soul, acquiring serenity and inner equilibrium through \"the therapy of desire\" (M. Nussbaum) and \"the education of affectivity\" (P. Aubenque). These \"techniques of the self\" (I make use of M. Foucault's expression) shouldn't be regarded as applications of a philosophical doctrine of some kind; they are the very concretization of a philosophy, its \"incorporation,\" synonymous with the subjectivation of a discourse of truth. The Contemporary Spirituality Crisis and the Levels of Resistance to the Idea of Philosophy as \"a Way of Life\" and \"Care of the Self\" I am convinced that we shouldn't hurry with the celebration of this alleged re-appreciation of philosophy in terms of \"way of life\" (P. Hadot) and genuine ascetics (Foucault); it is natural to ask ourselves whether we are dealing with something more than an attractive slogan lacking any coverage in daily life. And it is clear that, no matter how sincere this appeal made by some of the notable figures in contemporary philosophy may be, it has to face powerful resistances. The first level of resistance is no other than the prevailing sociocultural context, one so favorable to the idea of self-acceptance. We are being bombarded on all channels with messages, commercials, promos, \"enlightening\" examples, and motivational speeches whose basic idea seems to be the following: Learn to accept yourself as you are, and everything will be fine! An amazing web of forces is eroding the faith in the spiritual potential within each of us that is in our inborn capacities of personal evolution, our power of self-fashioning and self-cultivation. How far we are today from that precept of sages from Antiquity: learn to accept Foucault, The Government of Self and Others (1982-1983), trans. G. Burchell (Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), pp. 251-252. The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 143 what is not in your power to change, but never indulge in accepting yourself \"as you are\" – there is always room for improvement; there is always room for spiritual development and self-change! We thus forget the warning that could be read behind Nietzsche's definition of man as \"the animal whose nature has not yet been fixed\"8: the moment we stopped evolving, we've already begun to devolve! What we risk losing for good in the \"affluent society\" is precisely the idea of spiritualizing daily life, not in a mystical sense9, but in the sense of a continuous effort (hence the generic meaning of the philosophical \"askesis\") to expand our horizons and deepen our perspective, acknowledging the fact that, \"in contrast to the tradition of the cogito and to the pretension of the subject to know itself by immediate intuition, ...we understand ourselves only by the long detour of the signs of humanity deposited in cultural works.\"10 Ch. Taylor has underlined the following fact: a \"simplified expressivism\" permeated Western society after the Second World War.11 We are told incessantly: be yourself! But the right question to ask ourselves is whether this modern obsession for authenticity (generating all kinds of \"recipes\" for personal happiness) is not, in fact, yet another mechanism in service of the \"System,\" certifying the \"biopolitical paradigm\" of our time (so-named by critics of modernity such as Foucault or Agamben): a paradigm in which the telos of our existence is practically reduced to the \"ideal\" of physical and economic health of the society's members, and the subjectivation of human beings is being realized by a repertoire of disciplinary techniques aiming at the \"normalization\" and leveling of individuals. Encouraging us to \"be ourselves\" without stipulating any need for a prior spiritual \"training\" whatsoever, the modern ideal of authenticity is addressed to an individual led to believe that he can find himself through a spontaneous and unprogrammed effort. Convinced that he is knowingly \"choosing himself,\" the individual who is in complete ignorance of the ancient \"techniques of the self\" (techniques of detachment, of analyzing representations, and enhancing attention) is actually and unavoidably 8 See Fr. Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, § 62. 9 Following Foucault's suggestions from his 1982 course at Collège de France, if \"we will call 'philosophy' the form of thought that ... attempts to determine the conditions and limits of the subject's access to the truth ... then I think we could call 'spirituality' the search, practice, and experience through which the subject carries out the necessary transformations on himself in order to have access to the truth,\" M. Foucault, The Hermeneutics of the Subject. Lectures at the Collège de France 1981-1982, trans. G. Burchell (Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), p. 15. 10 See P. Ricoeur, From Text to Action: Essays in Hermeneutics II, trans. Kathleen Blamey and John B. Thompson (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1991[1986]). 11 Ch. Taylor, A Secular Age (Harvard University Press, 2007), p. 475. 144 Cristian Iftode assimilating one of the identity \"recipes\" that circulates on the market.12 Each of us thinks he is being \"himself,\" but we all become the same: people following the latest fashion and trends, hollow, obsessed with material wealth, and deprived of any spiritual horizon. \"When one sees the meaning, or rather the near-total absence of meaning, given to all the familiar expressions, such as: come back to yourself, free yourself, be yourself, be authentic, etc....one might begin to suspect the impossibility of constituting today an ethic of the self. However, it is perhaps an urgent, fundamental, and politically indispensable task, that of constituting an ethic of the self, if it is true that after all there is no other point...of resistance to political power than in the relation of the self to itself,\" stated Foucault in his 1982 course at Collège de France.13 An edifying clue regarding the spiritual crisis we are facing today14 comes also from the confrontation of the Socratic maxim of care of the self – the fundamental principle for the entire Greek and Latin ancient philosophy, at least in Foucault's view – with the principle of moral indifference toward yourself, so fashionable today. This last principle could be seen as the slogan of an ethical minimalism exerting great power of seduction in the present context, a minimalism whose stake is to transfer the principle of neutrality from political liberal philosophy into the realm of personal relationships, by denying the relevance of any moral judgment about what you are doing with your own life, as long as you are not causing any direct and intended harm to others15. But we could again ask ourselves if this principle of \"neutrality\" is not in fact yet another instrument of disciplinary power designed to put us off our guard, a slogan behind which operates multiple conditionings and manipulations, diverse and subtle techniques of domination, leveling, and \"normalization.\" We spoke until now about a cultural and social resistance that the revival of the meaning of philosophy as \"care of the self\" has to face. A second resistance comes from the philosophical sphere itself, more precisely, from the tradition of modern moral philosophy, a philosophy 12 Thus, the demand for authenticity loses any actual meaning and, worse than that, it becomes itself a disciplinary technique, an instrument used in ascribing to individuals \"normal,\" standard identities, reassuring them that this is what they \"really\" want or what they \"really\" are. 13 The passage is quoted from E. McGushin, Foucault's Askêsis: An Introduction to the Philosophical Life (Evanston, IL.: Northwestern University Press, 2007), p. XV. The full passage, in a slightly different translation, is to be found in M. Foucault, The Hermeneutics of the Subject, pp. 251-252. 14 A theme for reflection that perhaps shouldn't remain the monopoly of religious fundamentalism is the extent to which a specific \"spirituality\" crisis in Western society could be regarded as one of the key factors in the current global economic crisis. 15 See R. Ogien, L'éthique aujourd'hui. Maximalistes et minimalistes (Paris : Ed. Gallimard, 2007). The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 145 focused on the elaboration of theories of right action that bracket (when not explicitly denying) the very possibility of fashioning the character through \"practices of the self.\" If we take into consideration the general framework in which moral philosophy has been elaborated in twentieth century, I think we can easily observe a few major tendencies: (A) Anglo-Saxon moral philosophy was characterized by an oscillation between the Kantian tradition of duty-based ethics and versions of utilitarianism. But what these two methods of moral thinking have in common, despite the differences – intrinsically right principles vs. rational evaluation of consequences – is \"the impersonal point of view,\" the assumption that the right action is the action that any given subject should choose in a similar situation. It is clear that such an approach implies, as I said earlier, the bracketing of the meaning of ethics as an \"ascetic\" work whose goal is the \"self-fashioning\" of the individual. (B) On the Continent, in the first half of the twentieth century, as in the years following the Second World War, we witness the rise of a number of existentialist ethics that highlight the subject's \"transcendence\" and the agent's freedom, but are denying this subject any substantial reality, reducing it to (or confronting it with) \"a set of perpetually open possibilities.\" It would follow that any \"self-choice\" is nothing but an accident, a contingent fact, the ideal of authenticity thus being reduced to a perpetual self-distancing or self-denial (at least this is the Sartrean conception of the thirties and forties, one so influential in its times16). Then, the ascent of structuralism in the decades following the war is in fact synonymous with that announcement of \"the death of the subject\" earlier mentioned: a subject seen only as a variable position in a structure or being reduced to a simple discursive function, a kind of approach that seemed, at that point, to produce the decisive frame for the \"dissolution\" of the traditional issues of ethics (\"the good life\") into a \"political\" theory searching to define \"the optimum of political functioning.\"17 It is not before the 1980s – on one hand, by the emergence and the success of \"philosophical counseling\" in the Anglo-Saxon space (a practice resuming, in a very pragmatic spirit, the ancient claims of philosophy to prove itself relevant in the context of daily life), and on the other hand by 16 Note how MacIntyre points out that the \"nullity\" of the self, separated from its social roles, is a common assumption (and thus symptomatic for the \"spirit of the time\") of two seemingly opposite approaches, such as Sartrean existentialist philosophy and Goffman's sociology, see Al. MacIntyre, After Virtue. A Study in Moral Theory (University of Notre Dame Press, 2007), p. 32. 17 See, for instance, the interview given by M. Foucault to P. Caruso in 1967, \"Qui êtes-vous, professeur Foucault?\", reproduced in M. Foucault, Dits et écrits I. 1955-1975 (Paris: Ed. Gallimard (Quarto), 2001), pp. 645-646. 146 Cristian Iftode the extremely favorable reception of the pledges of Hadot or Foucault for understanding ancient philosophy as being ultimately a form of life18 – that the possibility to see the constitution of the ethical subject as the explicit stake and task of practical philosophy is constantly and insistently brought into discussion.19 A third level of resistance that the philosophical concern for the \"care of the self\" has to face is located in the field of a moral psychology that declines the very possibility of ethical subjectivation by challenging the central assumption of any \"virtue ethics\": the idea that the \"character\" of a human being can be shaped by forming some stable habits or behavior reflexes. This rejection would seem justified on the basis of two different (even opposite) approaches: (A) In the psychology of personality there is an influent current called \"situationism,\" which states, on the basis of some empirical researches more or less relevant, the non-existence of character in a strong, Aristotelian sense.20 For instance, conducting a series of tests on preschool children designed to provoke reactions of honesty and honor, some psychologists pointed out the fact that these children behaved fairly or unfairly in a totally inconsistent way; hence, it was concluded that \"honesty\" is not an \"inner entity,\" but only \"a function of situation.\" Still, let's recognize that an Aristotelian wouldn't feel at all embarrassed by such an experiment, precisely because he is not tempted to refer to the personality of a child as something certifying Rousseauist purity of the authentic and intrinsically good \"self,\" uncontaminated by society, but only as to a raw material to be shaped. Also, the critics of virtue ethics often tend to neglect a fundamental distinction for the Stagirite, that between \"natural virtues\" and \"real virtues,\" the former being nothing more than rough and especially fluctuating impulses that, in the absence of right assessment of each 18 Let's not forget the massive success, not only in the French space, currently registered by the books of L. Ferry, M. Onfray or A. ComteSponville. 19 It can be argued in this context that the analysis of the \"care of the self\" in ancient philosophy is the starting point in formulating a current philosophical alternative to the various attempts to \"deconstruct the subject\" registered in the twentieth century. However, it can be argued, based on Derrida's statements, that the experience of \"deconstruction\" is a \"spiritual exercise\" in itself, necessary to all of us that have received a philosophical education (see on this topic E. McGushin, \"Foucault and the Problem of the Subject,\" in Philosophy and Social Criticism, vol. 31, 5-6 / 2005). 20 See on this matter J. Doris, Lack of Character: Personality and Moral Behavior (Cambridge University Press, 2002), pp. 23-27, approvingly quoted by R. Ogien, L'éthique aujourd'hui, pp. 63-66. The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 147 situation, often cause reckless behavior, contrary to truly virtuous conduct.21 (B) There would be yet another alternative, opposite to the one outlined above, but equally disastrous for \"virtue ethics\": to claim that \"characters\" really do exist, but in a sense so strong that they are exclusively the result of heredity, possibly of the experiences from the first years of life, however, excluding any prospect of further (re)shaping! In the same context, recalling that \"character shaping\" is, in terms of the Ancients, a task synonymous with \"the education of affectivity\" and, at the same time, defining emotions as \"involuntary reactions\" in the strictest sense,22 we would conclude that the idea of acquiring the virtues is a goal lacking any coverage in real life. But what if we were to confront these two divergent positions and, using a strategy not at all unfamiliar to philosophers, see the Situationist arguments as arguments supporting the possibility of considering the self not a fixed and immutable given, but a work to accomplish? I think a similar strategy is also used by P. Ricoeur when, taking note of the sequence of puzzling cases through which Parfit sought to undermine the importance we \"spontaneously\" attach to the idea of \"personal identity,\" he suggests that we see them not as arguments in favor of a \"quasi Buddhist\" dissolution of the self, but as arguments stressing the need to assume a narrative conception about the self.23 Perhaps our personal identity is truly not the summing up of some physical determinations, but the assuming of a personal history – which is a completely different thing than the evidence of a \"psychological continuity\" more or less fluctuating. I also find relevant for what I have earlier qualified as being the death of \"the death of the subject\" in contemporary philosophy the fact that in the last decades of the twentieth century, two philosophers descending from completely different traditions, D. Dennett and Ricoeur, come to propose (beyond all that separates their conceptions and methods) an open notion of narrative self as 21 \"Each of us seems to possess the character he has in some sense by nature, since right from birth we are just, prone to temperance, courageous, and the rest. Nevertheless, we expect to find that what is really good is something different, and that we shall possess these qualities in another way; for both children and animals have the natural states, but without intellect they are obviously harmful ... But if the agent acquires intellect, then his action is quite different; his state, while similar to what it was, will then be real virtue ... so there are two in the part related to character – natural virtue and real virtue; and of these, real virtue does not develop without practical wisdom,\" Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, VI, 13, 1144b, trans. R. Crisp (Cambridge University Press, 2004). 22 A possibility outlined by R. Ogien, L'éthique aujourd'hui, p. 67. 23 See P. Ricoeur, Oneself as Another, trans. K. Blamey (The University of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 138-139. 148 Cristian Iftode a way to overcome the paradoxes that the problem of personal identity has raised in modern philosophy. Aporias that Define the Philosopher's Condition: (a) Disinterested Contemplation vs. Existential Practice; (b) Socratic-Nietzschean Unsettlement vs. Full Embrace of a Philosophy of Life; (c) Self-Creation vs. Self-Discovery If we try to regard philosophy not as a body of theories having questionable applications in the real life, but as a set of social practices, most of which have a discursive character or even an eminently dialogical one, I think the following aspect will result: the aporias that we first have to face are not those that equally configure and complicate the philosophical discourse in general, but the aporias that illustrate this \"form of life\" that is philosophy, philosophy as a practice, therefore the aporias defining the condition of the philosopher himself or herself!24 I will try to make explicit three such aporias intimately linked, drawn from what I would imagine as an open-ended series: (a) The first emphasizes the tension between the aim of philosophical \"contemplation\" on one hand, understood as a way to transcend the concrete data of existence and to connect, by Reason, to the eternal and the universal, and to the \"practical\" meaning of philosophy on the other (\"the return to the cave,\" if we were to make use of the Platonic metaphor), the task of enlightening and educating, the care of the self and of one's fellows, which many philosophers have felt as their ultimate calling. At this point, we are not speaking, as before, of two conflicting metaphilosophical views (\"one focusing on the pole of discourse, the other, on the pole of life choice\"25), but instead we are trying to grasp what may lay behind a personal choice for philosophy. Each of us who have received philosophical instruction should ask ourselves why we chose philosophy: in order to escape from the miseries and frustrations of everyday life in an \"ivory tower,\" or because we fostered the belief that philosophy can change our lives and our selves, that it can bring us \"spiritual strengthening\" and greater control over the daily facts of life, a control emerged from a superior understanding of the world, of the relationships with the others, and with ourselves? And yet, it is precisely because I don't think we can give a clear-cut answer to this question that I am speaking of an \"aporia.\" 24 Following Aristotle but also N. Hartmann, I assume that the discovery of \"aporias\" does not amount to a definitive blockage, to a stunning of thought; on the contrary, an aporia could be seen as the invitation to find a personal answer (with contextual validity) to an \"eternal problem.\" 25 See P. Hadot, La philosophie comme manière de vivre : Entretiens avec J. Carlier et A. Davidson (Albin Michel, 2001). The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 149 Hadot has shown that in the ancient world, the philosopher always seemed to the others a strange (atopos), unclassifiable character, one who was not \"at ease\" in the world. All the ancient schools of philosophy, even the Skeptics, saw the philosophical life as a rupture of the quotidian; \"but at the same time, the philosopher acts in the quotidian life, sometimes giving even specific indications.\"26 Socrates provided the model par excellence of the philosophical life, conceived not as a complete escape from the quotidian, but as a way of sustaining a modified and lucid relationship with oneself, with others, and with nature. (It is here that we could detect the roots of Heidegger's notion of \"authenticity\"). This relationship defines the very meaning of the spiritual conversion attained through the practice of philosophy in Antiquity: not the immersion in a private, interior world of a human being, but a modified relation to the \"exterior,\" or the entire network of practices that equally express and constitute the self (as extended self, to use an expression borrowed from sociology, as opposed to the modern nuclear self). Plutarch, as reminded by Hadot, clearly stated: \"Socrates was a philosopher not because he taught from a chair, but because he talked to his friends and joked with them; he also went in the agora and, in the end, he had an exemplary death. So it is the practice of Socrates's everyday life that was his true philosophy.\"27 Still, such a judgment may seem extreme and unfair in regard to all of those philosophers who had outstanding contributions in various fields of academic philosophy, even though there was nothing special about their lives, at least compared with Socrates's legendary destiny. This is why I would prefer to suggest that a general and very formal \"solution\" of the aporia above may lay in its \"temporalization\": trying to see philosophical contemplation as a necessary moment of escape from the quotidian, and the \"care of the self,\" the community practices, as a necessary sequel of the philosophical course.28 But I believe a more accurate picture would be that of a continuous \"back and forth\" along the entire philosophical life, between the space of abstract thought and the demands arising from the fact of living in the world and sharing it with your fellow people. It should be said that the \"abstract\" often proves itself to be \"a necessary hiding space\" and an existential respite in order \"for understanding, and maybe change, to take place\"29: you temporarily run away from the death of your loved one by thematizing \"the being-toward-death.\" But the important thing is not to forget to return and examine your concrete existence in the light of your 26 Ibid., p. 162. 27 Ibid., p. 164. 28 The Stoics could provide us with the model of combining the exercise of the \"view from above\" in their moments of solitude with the focus on the present and the increasing of attention in relation to others in the agora. 29 See L. Amir, \"Philosophical Practice: A Method and Three Cases,\" in Practical Philosophy, vol. 6.1, 2003, pp. 36-41. 150 Cristian Iftode philosophical commitments; without the belief in the power of philosophy to change and improve your life, you are no better than any sophist. It is also worth adding that, in the end, each philosophical school of Antiquity proposed a specific way of conversion and of harmonization of the theoretical dimension of philosophy with the demands of living in community, but that these \"life choices\" are placed, following Hadot's point of view, in a relatively small number of \"transhistorical or transcultural\" possible attitudes toward existence.30 (b) A second aporia that a philosopher has to face engages other two conflicting demands: the Socratic-Nietzschean demand for a specific unsettlement and a continuous experimentation, an extreme willingness to place oneself in any position, to judge things from as many perspectives as possible, to think otherwise than before, to think against your own \"intuitions\" and prejudices, confronted with the demand for full acceptance of a particular point of view, involving a notion of authenticity that \"condemns\" to an existence lived in perfect harmony with the philosophical principles already adopted. You do not permit yourself to stop before any ultimate wisdom, ultimate goodness, ultimate power, while unharnessing your thoughts;...perhaps man will rise ever higher as soon as he ceases to flow out into a god.31 On one hand, the critical willingness that a philosopher must prove by questioning any personal belief and by always trying to see things through other theoretical \"lenses\" than the ones he or her has grown accustomed to use32 seems to be a prerequisite for any philosophical training whatsoever: assuming there exist, for instance, those \"transcultural\" philosophical attitudes Hadot spoke about (corresponding, say, to the six major schools of 30 See P. Hadot, La philosophie comme manière de vivre, pp. 118-119, where the French exegete mentions, for instance, the attitudinal agreement between Pyrrho and Lao Tzu, between the Plotinian mystic and some trends in Hindu thought, or between the Stoic attitude of accepting fate and of placing your individual existence in the grand scheme of things, and some Chinese or Buddhist attitudes. 31 Fr. Nietzsche, The Gay Science, § 285, trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1974), pp. 229-230. 32 \"Brief habits. I love brief habits and consider them an inestimable means for getting to know many things and states, down to the bottom of their sweetness and bitternesses\" (Nietzsche, The Gay Science, § 295, p. 236). Nietzsche refines this idea in a footnote: \"some stability and temporary equilibrium are needed to permit the concentration of all mental and emotional resources on the most important problems. One simply cannot question everything at once. The most one can do is to grant nothing permanent immunity.\" The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 151 philosophy in ancient Greece), how could I truly understand their positioning and particularities without becoming myself, in turn, Platonist, Epicurean, Stoic, Skeptic, and so forth? But on the other hand, the philosopher who confines himself or herself to change his or her ideas as often as he or she changes shirts loses credibility before his or her fellows and is considered a mere sophist. Besides the internal consistency of a doctrine, the harmony or the full correspondence between acts and words has always been a criterion for judging the relevance of a philosophy. And it is precisely this existential or – to use a term of ancient origin – \"parrhesiastic\"33 notion of truth that gave to the spiritual exercises the meaning of concrete techniques of subjectivation or \"incorporation\" of a philosophical discourse. The texts and, in particular, the courses from Foucault's last years brilliantly illustrate this tension between the demand of a permanent self-distancing (se déprendre de soi-même) and the requirement to make of your own life and body a \"theater of truth.\" Again, a specific \"temporalization\" seems to be the generic \"solution\" of the aporia, transforming its two \"arms\" in a succession of moments: the self-distancing may thus be regarded as an indispensable preparatory moment before choosing a particular philosophy. In fact, as in the previous case, it may be just a theoretical simplification of a continuous \"back and forth\": the philosopher is a person without dogmas, who puts everything \"on the table\" in any debate, in any genuine exercise of dialogue, only later to find out what remains of his or her beliefs or, more precisely, which of the ideas he has endorsed, in various formulations, return. (Here I have in mind a possible application of Nietzsche's doctrine of the Eternal Return as an \"ethical-selective\" criterion, in the sense of Deleuze's interpretation.34) Perhaps the philosopher's truths can never \"freeze,\" cannot take the form of definitive certainty, being only the ideas you regain, here and now, with every dialogue and every controversy. Likewise, maybe your projective self can only be subject to retrospective consideration: it is nothing but the \"precipitate\" of numerous variations35. 33 Term derived from the noun parrhêsia, the Greek word that designates boldness and freedom of speech. Initially employed in the political context of Athenian democracy, parrhêsia supposed the determination to speak the truth at any cost, to fearlessly speak at all times, regardless of the consequences. Foucault focused his last courses on the study of the ethical-philosophical implications of this notion. 34 See G. Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, trans. H. Tomlinson (Columbia University Press, 2006). 35 Assuming the fact that we cannot simply discover \"who we really are\" and that the elaboration of our own conception about life is always made on the ground of the possibilities of (self)interpretation available in our culture, we are left with the hope that by trying different perspectives and by constantly putting to the test our professed beliefs and commitments in the space of free dialogue, we will finally be able to \"sediment\" our guiding ideas. Perhaps this remains the only way to get to affirm \"It is a fact that I think what I think and I am what 152 Cristian Iftode (c) If we place the \"philosophical life\" conceived as \"true life\" (alêthês bios) between the two poles of authenticity mentioned above, we may be led to a third aporia: is the philosopher's \"self\" something that has to be (re)discovered or something that has to be created? \"I do not think it is ever completely clear or resolved ... whether the self is something to which you return because it is given in advance or an objective you must set for yourself and to which you might finally gain access if you achieve wisdom. Is the self the point to which you return through the long detour of ascesis and philosophical practice? Or is the self an object you keep always before your eyes and reach through a movement that in the end can only be bestowed by wisdom? I think this is one of the elements of fundamental uncertainty, or fundamental oscillation, in this practice of the self,\" stated Foucault in his 1982 course about the techniques of the self in Greek and Roman philosophy.36 In fact, this is the point that ultimately separates the two interpretations provided by Foucault and Hadot to the goal of \"salvation\" and spiritual conversion in Greek and Roman philosophy: while, for Hadot, the conversion signifies a way to access \"the best portion of the self,\" \"the perfect reason,\" thus reaching a kind of cosmic consciousness, Foucault would seek to identify the coordinates of a genuine \"culture of the self \" in late Antiquity, motivated by the aspiration to transform an ordinary life into a \"work of art.\"37 While Foucault is interested in shaping the coordinates of a self-creation process, insisting \"much more on the exercises of autosubjectivation, of the ethical fortification (reinforcement) of the self by I am,\" without implying a theological reference to the idea of personhood or the dismissal from the start of the idea of freedom. However, two clarifications should be made. First of all, I am not trying to suggest the possibility of a chronological sequence of moments; it is not about periods of life that would succeed in the philosophical \"training,\" but, as is also shown in thematizing the aporias outlined above, the more accurate perspective is that of a \"back and forth\" between philosophical debates and the daily life, a process of selfinterpretation without firm boundaries and an existential bet that will always preserve a dose of uncertainty. Secondly, it has to be said that the \"putting to the test\" refers to conceptions about life, not to immediate life decisions. I believe it is here that the uses of philosophical \"training\" stand out: while decisions about concrete life situations are generally irrevocable (in fact, you are never being offered a second chance, but, at the most, an another chance), regarding conceptions, you always have the chance to change your mind, to radically revise your beliefs and start over again. Philosophy could then become a \"school\" that prepares us for a life lived without regrets, increasing our chances to get to relate to our own existence as a whole in a fully committed fashion. 36 M. Foucault, The Hermeneutics of the Subject, pp. 213-214. 37 See P. Hadot, \"Reflections on the Idea of the 'Cultivation of the Self',\" in Philosophy as a Way of Life: Spiritual Exercises from Socrates to Foucault, trans. M. Chase (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd., 1995). The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 153 itself\" and \"marginalizing the spiritual exercises of the dissolution of the subject in a cosmic totality,\"38 Hadot interprets self-discovery as a release from the individual and an access to the universal, as an awareness of the fact that you are a part of nature and of \"universal reason,\" in other words, as a process of trans-subjectivation.39 A general indication in order to find a personal answer to the aporia \"discovered\" vs. \"created\" self could be the following: even a radical proponent of self-creation will have to agree that there will always remain something that cannot be regarded as a creation in itself, something that has to be acknowledged as \"already there,\" in the human person; at least the ability for self-creation remains something to be discovered as an original potency of each and every person. But the amount to which the alleged selffashioning is dependent on external factors or social and cultural conditionings varies greatly from one philosophical doctrine to another. The Practice of Philosophy and its Present Ethical and Political Relevance We began by addressing a vital question: What is the meaning and purpose of philosophy in the context of today's culture? Now, it seems that all the comments made so far were in fact aiming at the possibility to reformulate the starting question in a way that directly concerns us, in other words, in a more personal interrogation: What is the task of a philosopher today? It may be considered that asking the question about the philosopher's task in a way that directly connects him or her to the present already expresses a specifically modern attitude. (Analyzing Kant's small text Was ist Aufklärung?, published in 1784 as an answer to an inquiry carried out by a German periodical, Foucault regarded it as a paradigmatic text for modernity, insofar as Kant explicitly inaugurated there a type of critical reflection in which a philosopher openly addresses the problem of \"the contemporary status of his own enterprise.\"40) This \"attitude of modernity,\" 38 F. Gros, \"Le souci de soi chez Michel Foucault: A Review of The Hermeneutics of the Subject,\" in Philosophy and Social Criticism, vol. 31, 5-6 / 2005, pp. 698-699. 39 \"Seneca does not find his joy in 'Seneca', but by transcending 'Seneca'; by discovering that there is within him – within all human beings, that is, and within the cosmos itself – a reason which is a part of universal reason\". P. Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, p. 207. 40 \"No doubt it is not the first time that a philosopher has given his reasons for undertaking his work at a particular moment. But it seems to me that it is the first time that a philosopher has connected in this way, closely and from the inside, the significance of his work with respect to knowledge, a reflection on history and a particular analysis of the specific moment at which he is writing and because of which he is writing. It is in the reflection on \"today\" as difference in history and as motive for a particular philosophical task that the novelty of this text appears to me to lie,\" see M. Foucault, \"What is 154 Cristian Iftode as Foucault named it, would suppose, precisely, a critical interrogatory with respect to the present, a philosophical problematization of our own \"historical mode of being.\"41 In fact, it is not until modern times that the present itself becomes a central issue. The claim to reach an eternal, unhistorical truth becomes increasingly difficult to sustain, and the connection between the philosophical reflections on one hand and the present moment on the other (that is, a particular social, cultural, or scientific context) becomes an explicit task. \"You have no right to despise the present,\" warned Baudelaire, approvingly quoted by Foucault. So how are we to answer the question about the philosopher's task in the present context? I shall propose only some guiding threads that may help us in finding a viable answer to this question. I think that when you try to look \"from the outside\" at the history of philosophy and see it as the history of a genre of discourse, sooner or later you will be haunted by a form of exasperation close to despair. On one hand, you realize that the effort of conceptual clarification knows no end and that you cannot avoid a kind of \"regression to infinity\": you may very well build a philosophical jargon where you will get the impression of comfortably living (maybe together with your philosophical \"friends\"), but you will never be able to fully overcome the semantic indistinction that requires the bringing of your philosophical terms into the so-called \"common\" language as soon as you need to explain yourself, to make yourself understood by a public. On the other hand, a structural analysis of the types of philosophical discourse may give the impression that, in the end, there is nothing but an impersonal textual machine: everything is being reduced to an indefinite series of structural oppositions or hierarchicaloppositive structures,42 pairs of concepts placed in opposition to each other only to reveal afterward their mutual complicity or chiasmic nature. It seems enough to detect the structural opposition that outlines some problem's field in order to subsequently obtain the number of (logical) possibilities of location in that field, the \"functionalization\" possibilities of that aporia, each possibility being sooner or later linked to some philosopher's name.43 Enlightenment?\", in P. Rabinow (ed.), The Foucault Reader, (New York: Pantheon Books, 1984), p. 38. 41 Ibid., p. 42. 42 \"...one might say philosophy's unique thesis, the thesis which constitutes the concept of metaphor, the opposition of the proper and the nonproper, of essence and accident, of intuition and discourse, of thought and language, of the intelligible and the sensible,\" see J. Derrida, \"White Mythology: Metaphor in the Text of Philosophy,\" in Margins of Philosophy, trans. A. Bass (The Harvester Press, 1982), p. 229. 43 The \"quarrel of the universals\" remains the paradigmatic example of philosophical \"production\" in the field of an \"eternal\" problem. A book that The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 155 It is only when you try to regard philosophy as a personal \"affair\"; when you ask yourself how it is possible to choose one particular philosophy over so many, how it is possible that this sum of abstractions directly concern you, and how it is that you resonate with certain \"founding metaphors\" (from a philosophical discourse) rather than others; when you ask yourself how you can be moved by a philosophy, how it may seduce you, convince you, how it might really become your \"philosophy of life\"; it is then and only then that the problem of self-choosing regains its central significance and the choice for a particular philosophy becomes a consequence or a personal option on the horizon of this fundamental choice. It is then that philosophy reveals to yourself a whole spectrum in which you can gain (or waste) your freedom, if not a higher form of freedom in itself – the \"spiritual\" one. Perhaps it is only at this level, when confronted by the task of selfchoice, that you can rediscover, after many sterile experiments, the confidence in philosophy – a confidence corresponding to that hope that defines us, above all despair and exasperation, as projective beings, looking for something, in need of purpose and direction. In this context, we can truly grasp the value of the lesson provided by MacIntyre in his famous book After Virtue44: the teleologism continues to function on a \"local\" scale, giving meaning to our personal histories, even after the alleged abandonment of the grand narratives of legitimation, abandonment which would characterize, using Lyotard's notorious expression, our \"postmodern condition.\"45 The same context grounds the salutary attempt to change our representation about the nature of philosophy, ceasing to consider it as the summing of some abstract theories and instead trying to regard it as being from the start a \"form of life\" and a set of practices whose goal is the selftransformation of the individual,46 the never complete release from various social conditionings, and the widening of the range of options. We could brilliantly illustrates this perspective is La querelle des universaux: De Platon à la fin du Moyen Age (Paris: Seuil, 1998), by A. de Libera. 44 See Al. MacIntyre, After Virtue. A Study in Moral Theory, first edition: (University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), in particular chapter 15: \"The Virtues, the Unity of a Human Life and the Concept of Tradition.\" 45 See J.-F. Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, trans. G. Benington and B. Massumi (University of Minnesota Press, 1984). 46 \"But the active life is not necessarily active in relation to other men, as some people think, nor are only those processes of thought active that are pursued for the sake of the objects that result from action, but far more, those speculations and thoughts (theôrias kai dianoêseis) that have their end in themselves and are pursued for their own sake; for the end is to do well, and therefore is a certain form of action (praxis tis). And even with actions done in relation to external objects, we predicate action in the full sense chiefly of the master-craftsmen who direct the action by their thoughts (dianoiais architektonas).\" Aristotle, Politics, VII, 3, 1325b, trans. H. Rackman (Harvard University Press, 1959). 156 Cristian Iftode state that the telos of \"authenticity\" thus migrates from the so problematic realm of \"being yourself\" to the position of a temporary escape from the \"System\" – an escape that will not leave you unchanged. More than this, I believe that this shift to self-transformation or spiritual conversion reconsidered as the ultimate philosophical end is also consistent with a significant contemporary mutation with respect to our understanding of the notion of truth. Our hermeneutical age makes us extremely skeptical about both the idea of factual correspondence (our \"truths\" prove to be provisional, only \"hinges\" of some episteme or paradigm) and the idea of textual coherence (there will always remain points of undecidability). As to the possibility of an essential revelation, we reasonably doubt the function and the recognition that a prophet or a \"master of truth\" could still claim in a \"disenchanted,\" secularized world. Our truth remains the making of the truth (facere veritatem), the confirmation of the truth by someone's living example: more simply put, truth is what you make true by keeping your word. Our truth is a truth of hope (not of faith or entrustment), the truth of promise, the commitment for a future truth, in a world shared with our fellows. There is no doubt that we may frequently encounter similar reflections about the importance of self-realization on the beaten track of the so-called pop culture of authenticity. But what if this entire self-help \"industry\" is not mistaken with respect to the central message, but rather in the manner in which it oversimplifies it,47 neglecting or, even worse, making us neglect all that is keeping us at every moment connected to the social network, promising us instead a seductive but illusory radical alternative: the \"inner\" self? Maybe the self always already lives outside of itself, and what we can really do about it – and what we should perhaps not hesitate to express in all its \"banality\" – is trying to be a little better every day, in all our enterprises: only thus will our world become, here and there, a little better. Neither the \"world of ideas,\" nor the divine Revelation, nor the universal Reason can ground, today, the parrhesiastic truth, the truth of existence; the philosopher is forced to sustain his or her proposal before the community as the artist does, to submit it to local and historical validation, based on intersubjective criteria. But, in order not to fall back on the aporia that practically generated the modern ideal of authenticity as an individualistic declaration of independence from all the social roles we are constrained to assume with the purpose of being accepted by others, I would say that this validation is not the shallow recognition of the general public, but the recognition offered by the ones to whom you feel close, the ones you regard as being important characters in your narrative. Or, in an even more \"exclusivist\" perspective, the recognition provided by those you 47 \"The problem with self-help ideas is not that they are wrong, but that they are one-sided,\" Ch. Guignon, On being authentic (London and New York: Routledge, 2004, p. VIII). The Ends of Philosophy in the Context of Contemporary Biopolitics 157 recognize in your turn as being valuable and significant, those who have gone through a philosophical training like your own.48 In short, neither the withdrawal in a virtual space (it matters less than one might think if we are talking about Second Life or The Phenomenology of Spirit), nor the promotion of great revolutions (which will inevitably end, in the event of success, in another system of power and oppression), but only the work on yourself, the increased attention to you and others, and the attitude of critical vigilance continuously and consistently exercised toward all forms of disciplinary power remain today (perhaps today more than ever) the philosopher's task, and also the hope that philosophy still reserves for its practitioners. Faculty of Philosophy University of Bucharest Bucharest, Romania cristianiftode@yahoo.com 48 Isn't that the very meaning of Plato's warning from the Seventh Letter, addressed to anyone who would have ventured to claim \"competence\" in Platonism and, more generally, in philosophy? Perhaps we should acknowledge the fact that \"the love of wisdom,\" \"the care of the self,\" or Aristotelian happiness are callings that remain, in principal, universal, but are in fact accessible only to a spiritual élite.\n\nCHAPTER XII THE HUMAN VALUE OF CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE IN DEMOCRATIC SOCIETIES DORINA PĂTRUNSU Abstract: According to Aristotle, for an individual to be human is to have a place in a society. Such a place, I believe, can be located only relative to the existent institutions – even better, relative to the constraints the institutions set on the individual. In other words, the relevant place an individual has in a society structured according to some institutional network is circumscribed by the limits within which the individual may freely interact with the social environment. Arguably, in the societies guided by democratic values, there is a natural tendency of diminishing the differences among individuals in regard to their degrees of liberty. In principle, it is supposed that democratization generates that kind of social space in which institutional structure provides the individuals with equality in opportunities and with the same degree of liberty. By speaking about equality in opportunities and limits of liberty, I do not mean the obtaining of social uniformity, but rather the providing of equal conditions for each individual to develop freely his/her own personality, and also the imposing of equal constraints for each individual to respect his/her duties as member of society. Thus, to be individual in a democratic society is to enjoy an equal social status defined by certain generally accepted rights and duties. Nevertheless, in real life, democratic societies have to face cases where some rules fail to impose the same constraints upon each individual, acting systematically to the disadvantage of some of them. In such cases, the obvious and correct thing to say is that those people who are victimized are frustrated and, more than that, they are entitled to let others know about the unfairness of the current system of laws by protesting in one way or another. For one thing, in democratic societies civil protests are supposed to play a crucial role in the process of self-regulation and self-correcting of the institutional structure. In this connection, Anthony Arblaster (1987) justly remarks that society is perceived as a collection of individuals whose interests and preferences are different and divergent; but what brings a society into agreement with the democratic values is that each of the individual interests is acknowledged as legitimate and, hence, each of the individual options matters in the process of designing the institutional framework. This discussion aims to analyze civil disobedience – one of the means to be employed to the effect of improving the existent institutional system. In particular, civil disobedience is intended for a minority systematically 160 Dorina Pătrunsu disadvantaged by the laws imposed by a majority that is not well-informed. Of course, one of the presuppositions is that the majority is already committed to democratic values, including that all citizens should enjoy equal basic liberties. The direct consequence is that, in a case where a group of citizens is systematically oppressed, that is, some of their basic liberties are denied to them by some of the existing laws, the civil majority, if it were well-informed about the injustice, would be ready to put pressure on their political representatives to amend the system of laws. Let us consider for a moment that in a democratic country, there are elections. Before the second ballot tour there is a strong possibility that a candidate whose previous political statements express discriminatory beliefs directed against a certain ethnic minority will be elected. A group of individuals belonging to civil society decide to organize a demonstration to inform the population about the danger of xenophobia and the real convictions of the aforementioned political leader. But, during the elections, such a meeting is not legally allowed in this particular country. Thus, the participants commit an act of civil disobedience. Is it justified? I advocate not only for the legitimacy of such political acts, but also for the claim that the existence and the success of civil disobedience is a test-condition for any society oriented by democratic values. Keywords: civil disobedience, democratic society, globalization WHAT IS MEANT BY CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE? Civil disobedience, says John Rawls, is a political, conscientious, public act contrary to law, but remaining nonviolent, by which it is made an appeal to the sense of justice of the majority of the community, with the aim of bringing about a change in the law or institutions of government. (A Theory of Justice, cap. 5, § 55, p. 364) Along these lines, Garry Francione and Ana Charlton consider that civil disobedience is the purposeful violation of law to communicate the protester's belief that the law is unconstitutional or morally defective. (Demonstrating and Civil Disobedience: A Legal Guide for Activists, cap.4, §.1) Thus, it is customary to associate civil disobedience with those kinds of public protests that break the law in a nonviolent manner, with the intention of informing people about the unjustness of the legal system, and creating public support and pressure to force a change in the law in question. The acts of civil disobedience are not guided by anarchical principles, but rather by the idea of improving the existing laws in the spirit of justice. It is a familiar point that any democratic society should be a society open to change and improvement. But if this is so, then the possibility of taking the action of civil disobedience is a test for any democracy, because such an alternative, if available to civil society for controlling the government, gives individuals an important tool for adjusting the laws to their actual needs. Civil disobedience draws its justification and legitimacy The Human Value of Civil Disobedience in Democratic Societies 161 from the directory principles of any democracy: tolerance, diversity, and openness.1 Both the act of civil disobedience and its success require several steps: the existence of some injustice in the legal system by which a minority is systematically disadvantaged, and the identification of the injustice by some people of the minority; the effective protest consisting in the action of making public the truth about the injustice by breaking some laws, especially the laws responsible for the blamed injustice; the immediate reaction of the public authorities (i.e. the authorities legitimated by the majority) for reestablishing the order in accordance with the laws; the spreading of news through the media channels; the acknowledgement of the injustice by the majority and, as a subsequent reaction, a change in the law made by the representatives. Therefore, a discussion on the justification of civil disobedience should take into account at least two levels. On the first level, the analysis should identify which are the democratic principles shared by the majority of the social corpus – which are the principles that ground the institutional framework in any democratic society. The second level of analysis should identify the practical aspects that maximize the efficiency of an action of civil disobedience and minimize its risks. The present discussion focuses only on the theoretical level of analysis. On that level, two different justifications for the legitimacy of civil disobedience can be distinguished. To begin with, principle justification is supported by the fact that, in a democratic society, its major part is committed to the elements – premises, rules, and goals – specific to the democratic game. More specific in any democracy is what might give to any kind of protest its moral ground, even though the protest violates the existing legal system: the spread and popular option for obeying the democratic principles. Nothing is above the law except the principles inspiring the law. Therefore, the appeal to civil disobedience is a legitimate violation of the law, because the law, in its turn, violates the democratic principles. Functional-justification, the second kind of justification for civil disobedience, relies on the idea that it contributes, along with other forms of social protest, to the society, to the process of self-regulating and self1 According to Robert Nozick, one of the characteristics of a liberaldemocratic society is its capacity for receiving new individuals together with their wishes, preferences, and interests, even though these individuals are ethnically or racially different from the initial residential individuals, given the principles promoted by this kind of system, the democratic system. If the system is unjust, the late comers should have the same right as the older ones in proposing modifications to, and, ultimately, modifying the system. See Nozick, Anarchy, State and Utopia, chapter 10. 162 Dorina Pătrunsu correcting. Thus, it is its status of sensor for inconsistency with the democratic principles that gives acts of civil disobedience their democratic legitimacy. Arblaster calls attention to what a danger the problems usually signaled by acts of civil disobedience – such as cases where minorities are disadvantaged in the process of political decision-making – would be for any democracy, if they were remain unknown to the majority and if the majority were insensitive to the aspirations of individuals belonging to minorities. In his paper Democracy, Arblaster remarks that \"the existence of permanent minorities, whose aspirations, wishes, and even principles are systematically ignored or overridden in the collective decision-making processes, can easily make a majoritarian democracy unworkable.\" (p. 68). He reiterates the point a bit later, showing that \"a democracy in which some groups, ethnic, religious, or political, are permanently in a minority, and thus, in opposition, is likely to be instable and may lose legitimacy.\" (p. 71) CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE – AN APPEAL TO THE THIRD AUTHORITY The act of civil disobedience should be understood as an endeavor made by some individuals to be acknowledged in their social space. The Aristotelian idea that the individual cannot be human outside of a social space (that is, the individual's membership in some polis is a necessary condition for being human) should be supplemented with the specification that the individual acquires human status only if the individual and his/her fundamental aspirations and interests are acknowledged by the social environment. Along the same lines, Berlin notes that the individual wishes to be acknowledged and understood even though such acknowledgment might bring hate or antipathy against the individual; the only persons able to give the individual the acknowledgement sought are the very members of the society with which the individual is historically, morally, economically, and, in some cases, ethnically related.2 If we grant that it is essential for any individual to receive social acknowledgement and consideration as a fundamental need, we should also admit that his/her attitude toward the existing rules, rights, duties, and obligations regulating public interactions among individuals is to be judged according to the degree to which the content of the social rules shows acknowledgement of the individual's interests. Given the premises that (1), the individual's actions and behavior acquire intelligibility only when considered in the context of the interactions the individual has with other individuals, and (2), that these interactions, in order to be optimal, have to be regulated by some rules, then the conclusion that the existing social rules are necessary does not follow. 2 See Berlin, Four Essays on Liberty, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969), p. 241. The Human Value of Civil Disobedience in Democratic Societies 163 What follows is only the necessity of there being social rule in general. The social rules existing at a certain time should not be treated as absolute truths, but rather as standing under the sign of contingency in a land of approximation.3 The present rules specific to any period of time have at most a temporal guidance role, and they remain to be dismissed, revised, or amended according to the social dynamic and the particular crises emerging in the community. Recall what shock waves the technologic revolutions (e.g., the possibility of human cloning, sex-change surgery, etc.) and the emancipation of various minorities produced in the law system. Thus, the act of civil disobedience is justified as long as it signals a certain state of affairs in conflict with the social rules, the latter oppressing the individual's development of personality and the affirmation of the individual's identity. Berlin claims that the laws ruling a society should rely on fundamental human needs. Granting that almost any individual pursues the fulfilment of the fundamental needs, Berlin infers that the changes affecting and modulating individuals' needs provide, when necessary, a reliable guidance for revising the social rules. By militating for an agreement among the fundamental needs and the existing rules, the act of the person who chooses the solution of civil disobedience becomes justified and justifiable to the majority. (It should be noted here that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is the document by which the fundamental human needs are explicitly defended, this document grounding most of the modern democratic constitutions.) The protest against the instauration by law of censorship or of restrictions on personal moral behavior, says Berlin, is based upon the belief that the prohibited activities correspond to some human fundamental needs, their prohibition being nothing else than a violation of personal liberties.4 Berlin justly notices that, in a democracy, the law is a product of the will of the majority, but, given that society is a heterogeneous construct, the will of the majority should not be taken for a coincidence of individual wills. Therefore, naturally, the law can come to affect some minorities in a negative way. In fact, this is the very limitation brought by majority rule. Then the question is: what would justify the protest made by a minority against a law adopted by a majority? In my view, the question as it is now cannot be answered. An analysis of whether or not a protest is justified requires some specifications about how the protest is made. In our case, the specification is that a protest consisting of an act of civil disobedience involves the protestant's breaking the law in a nonviolent way. Of course, if the protests remain within the limits prescribed by free speech rights, their justification is a superfluous matter. But, if they break the law, as is the case with the protests of civil disobedience, their justification requires some elaboration. The question is: \"Who is right? The defenders of the law expressing the will of the majority, or the protesters who break the law in 3 See also Berlin, p. 272. 4 Ibid., p. 255. 164 Dorina Pătrunsu order to call attention to its unfairness?\" The question requires a choice to be made between the authority of the order imposed by a majority and the authority of a protest shaking the actual order in the name of justice. The answer should rely upon a third authority that is higher than both parts. According to Berlin, as I have mentioned, fundamental human needs constitute the wanted referential authority. Democratic principles make explicit the ideal of respecting those needs. Therefore, if the contested law is in contradiction with some higher principles, such as some democratic principles, then the action of breaking the law in order to highlight the contradiction is justified even though the law is an expression of the will of the majority. The inference may also have practical value if it is the case that the majority is committed to democratic principles, and the imposing of the conflicting and contested law is nothing more than the effect of a lack of information. For Peter Singer, the justification of civil disobedience is given by the intention of informing about an injustice. The protester's actions disobey the law, but obey the principle of communication on which a well-formed democracy depends. In his Applied Ethics, Singer says that the law imposed by the majority is not violated in order to force the majority to change its decision, but rather for the sake of informing the majority about the injustice made by supporting a contestable law through a hasty decision.5 Singer shows that, frequently, the conflicting decision is not a genuine expression of the will of the majority. Rather, the decision is made by the representatives by virtue of their investiture by the majority, and it is different from the opinion shared by the majority. Thus, many times, the act of civil disobedience undertaken by a minority is not against a majority, but rather the protest does the majority a service by informing it about the sideslip of its representatives. Rawls posits the analysis on civil disobedience within the context of the conflict of duties, such as the conflict between the duty to obey the law and the duty to participate to the implementation of the principles of justice in valid laws. Thus, according to Rawls, the act of civil disobedience is justified because it is entitled by the highest authority of \"the natural duty of justice.\" By the same token, I believe that the conflict between the defenders of the law and civil disobedience can be translated as a conflict between two kinds of interpretations of the principles of justice. On one hand, there are some inaccurate, but publicly notorious interpretations. On the other hand, there are some accurate interpretations whose defenders fight for their public recognition. For the case of civil disobedience, the defenders of the second show that the first interpretations are not what they should have to recognize. In a society, says Rawls, there are only a small number of individuals situated in a superior position. Certainly, these lucky individuals have no 5 See Singer, Applied Ethics, (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986) p. 303. The Human Value of Civil Disobedience in Democratic Societies 165 interest in the transformation of the world. For one thing, they are content with their actual privileged status and do not want to degrade it by any change. In contrast, other individuals, being less lucky, feel frustrated and tend to act toward changing not only their own situation, but also toward reforming the political and legislative framework; that is to say, they orient their social behavior to their natural political duty. That the social attitudes of individuals are guided by a public conception of justice is a thesis that can also be found in the texts of Berlin: \"The respect for the principle of justice and the shame which we feel in the face of flagrant inequalities of treatment are as fundamental in a human being as the desire for freedom.6 THE FEEDBACK FUNCTION OF CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE The institutional framework of any democratic society should be a dynamic structure whose profile is continuously modulated by a mechanism by which the law comes under revision when it is necessary. The feedback function of this mechanism of self-regulation and self-stabilization is provided by civil society. In a democratic society, civil society plays the crucial role of signaling, when necessary, the incongruence between the legal system and social needs. Civil society is sensitive to the discrepancy between the present institutional design and the social state of affairs. Usually, the signals sent by civil society consist of debates about social problems, actions of protest, and proposals for social improvement. Thus, the action of civil disobedience as a reactive signal sent by civil society is not oriented against democratic society, but rather it helps democracy, behaving like a symptom of malfunction. The act of civil disobedience announces to society the existence of an anomaly in the implementation of the democratic principles. As Berlin remarks, the protesters appealing to civil disobedience do not claim an unlimited liberty, but rather they militate for an affirmation of the identity of the minority to which they belong. The starting point in the process of improvement of any institutional structure is marked by granting an approximate interpretation of the principle of justice and working with the law implementing the interpretation. This is a compromise justified by practical reasons: without such a starting point, the potential of finding the optimal interpretation by engaging in theoretical debates would disappear. There are at least two reasons for saying that legal debates are prevented from reaching in vitro the optimal form of a legal system. First, democratic debate cannot proceed without a legal framework. No matter how imperfect an institutional framework is in a democratic society, it should be seen as being a precondition for finding a better institutional solution. On the other hand, even though it is necessary for a period of time, no institutional framework should be considered sacrosanct. Once it comes 6 See Berlin, p. 255. 166 Dorina Pătrunsu under the fire of justified criticisms, even if those criticisms are communicated by actions of civil disobedience, the present institutional framework should be revised accordingly. The second reason against trying to find an optimal legal system exclusively by means of debates is that one cannot realize to what degree a law fulfills social expectations without confronting it in real situations, that is, without seeing how it succeeds in regulating human interactions. The act of civil disobedience is nothing more than one of the answers from social space, bearing relevant information about the justness of the laws. CONCLUSION Democratic society is based on the culture of acknowledging the identity of minorities. Civil disobedience is an extreme means for promoting the individuality of a minority and for protesting against the tyranny of the majority. There are two arguments that provide acts of civil disobedience with democratic legitimacy. Prima facie, the act of civil disobedience emerges from a conflict between a majority and a minority. Actually, the conflict is only between a minority and the representatives of the majority whose decisions oppressed the minority. Granting that a large part of the society shares democratic principles, it follows that the majority, if were correctly informed, would take side the minority. Fundamental human needs and their expressions, such as the democratic principles, constitute the ultimate authority. Therefore, in a democratic society, a political act should be morally judged only in relation to such an axiological authority. Consequently, civil disobedience is justified from a democratic perspective. The deployment of the second argument for legitimizing civil disobedience has emphasized the feedback function that justifies acts of protest in the process of self-regulation of society and its institutions. The paper leaves aside the discussion on the practical or implementational aspects of the acts of civil disobedience. Nevertheless, I want to remark that an exhaustive approach to the issue of civil disobedience, whose ultimate aspects are practical in nature, should try to answer the following question: how far could it reach? For one thing, the risks should be minimized for both parts involved in \"confrontation.\" On one hand, the individuals engaged in the action of civil disobedience should be granted a diminished risk of legal punishment. On the other hand, society should be secured against the risk of the degenerating of civil disobedience into violent manifestations and extended social instability akin to a state of anarchy. Faculty of Philosophy University Bucharest Bucharest, Romania patrunsu@yahoo.com CHAPTER XIII BEAUTY AS AN AESTHETIC VALUE: CONTEMPORARY CHALLENGES MIHAELA POP Abstract: The Avant-Gardes and especially the Dada movement generated a real revolution in the artistic world, not only at the theoretical level, but also by making artistic works. Aesthetic thought was called to answer to extremely courageous and shocking questions as the artists were exploring new ways of artistic expression. Theoretical principles, themes, methods of artistic work, materials, all were reconsidered. Was it \"the end of art\" already prophesized by Hegel? And what was going to happen after the end of art? And artistic beauty ... was it yet a value for the new kind of art initiated by Duchamp? These are some questions to which this article tries to give some coherent answers. After a short presentation of the Avantgarde movements and their main characteristics, we shall use some significant aesthetic theories and their arguments in order to prove the fact that beauty is not only a historical aesthetic value, it is a fundamental human value that always finds its expression in accordance with the cultural context of the moment. In order to be more pertinent in our analysis, we chose two artists whose works could illustrate our position. Keywords: artworld, aesthetic judgment, taste, beauty, conceptual art. Beauty used to be one of the most significant values in European culture, especially in the field of artistic production. It was one of the fundamental principles of human spirituality, beginning with Socrates and Plato. According to Plato, Beauty, in close connection with Truth and Good, had not only an aesthetic meaning, but also an ontological one. The aesthetic side of Beauty itself was, in its turn, based on the Pythagorean concepts of harmony, symmetry, and proportion. In fact, this meaning of Beauty became the basis for the magnificent classical art of ancient Greece. Later on, during the Renaissance, it was reactivated, contributing significantly to the artistic definition of Beauty as an aesthetic category. Afterward, the entire Western culture was dominated for centuries by this category, theorized by philosophers and artists until the end of the nineteenth century. Immanuel Kant and G.W.F. Hegel carried out deeper research on the aesthetic concept of beauty, pointing out that this general aesthetic category did not have only the Pythagorean meaning. Hegel moved forward with this matter, assuming that art should already have reached its end, since it is a product of the Spirit, which itself undergoes a process of evolution. Art was only a step taken in this process that should end in philosophical thought. 168 Mihaela Pop At the end of the nineteenth century, it seemed that Hegel's prediction became reality. Could the Avant-garde movement be considered anything other than a declaration of the \"end of art\"? All the \"traditional\" or \"classical\" criteria of making and evaluating art seemed to crumble down, piece by piece. The Impressionists abandoned many of the painting techniques in use, including the process of painting in the painter's workshop. Their manner of laying colors on the canvas grew more and more different from the \"classical\" one. Moreover, their paintings were, of course, only \"impressions\" of reality, impressions generated by the way real objects were illuminated by solar light. The main characteristic of the Impressionists' paintings was the fact that the real world was perceived in strict correlation with the moment of the day and the optical effect generated by the solar light at that very moment. The object could show many faces, from very bright and clear to very gloomy and strange. Thus, reality proved to be illusory or in some way uncertain, showing many different and various appearances. Cl. Monet Impression . Sunrise E. Manet Bar at Folies Bergères Then the Expressionists considered it more interesting to express their deep inner emotions freely, by means of colors. They hardly used clear lines in their drawings at all; instead, colors became their means to express themselves, to release very strong emotions arising from their inner tensions. Rouault, Munch, Rottluff, Marc, and Matisse endowed their colors and paintings with much force of expression. Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 169 G. Rouault-Mystic Masque E. Munch-Golgotha Sch. Rottluff-Skrigedal H. Matisse-Open Window F. Marc-The Blue Horse Other artists, such as Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, James Ensor, or Egon Schiele, were interested in expressing deep inner troubles, dissatisfactions, dilemmas, uncertainties, and fears. The war's horrors, as well as the alienating feeling of loosing one's personal identity in the fast-growing European towns of the Industrial Age were the fundamental themes worked out by the Expressionists. J. EnsorSkeletons E.L. Kirchner-Self E. Schiele Dead Mother Fighting for a Herring Portrait as a Soldier 170 Mihaela Pop The Cubist painters showed a deep interest in the study of reality in order to reveal its basic and almost geometric structure. The search for this structure supposed an elaborated process of de-construction. Braque and Picasso are illustrative examples, especially in their analytical phases, when they were looking for the basic geometric and rational elements of reality. G. Braques-Viaduct at Estaque P. Picasso-Weeping Woman Then, the Abstractionists Kandinsky and Klee1 pursued this process of de-construction of reality even more deeply. They eliminated any objective representation of a material reality. Thus, they succeeded in liberating colors from subordination to mimetic purposes. The point, the line, and the surface (in fact, the point in its moving process) were the main characters of Kandinsky's paintings. Abstractionist painting eliminated in this manner any surviving ideas of the principle known since the Renaissance as the principle of mimesis (the painting should be an image, a re-presentation of reality). The Abstractionists' principle said less is more and it proved their need for purity. The two-dimensional completely replaced the threedimensional in classical painting. And this movement was especially a conceptual one. 1 Wasily Kandinsky, Spiritualul în artă (Concerning the Spiritual in Art) (Bucureşti: Meridiane, 1994); Point et ligne sur plan (Point and Line to Plane) (Paris: Gallimard, 1991); Paul Klee, La pensée créatrice. Ecrits sur l'art(Creative Thought. Writings about Art) (Paris: Dessein et Tolra, 1989). Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 171 W. Kandinsky-Happy P. Klee-Southern Gardens P. Mondrian-Composition Structure And what could be the definition of artistic beauty for this movement? Or, for the Cubist way of painting? Are these paintings beautiful or they are not? It is clear that the characteristics of classical beauty, at least the visible ones, have been abandoned. But do such paintings lack any sense of order or rhythm (meaning symmetry and proportion)? The answer is \"No.\" If we take into consideration Kandinsky's and Klee's writings, we can see how much they were interested in thinking, in projecting their works. The point itself was considered mostly in its dynamic condition, an entire process of thinking and projecting relations among figures. The inner and exterior forces which acted upon this tiny element were also taken into consideration. Every element of the painting was considered in relation to every other element of the painting and to the entire structure itself. But this way of thinking was already specific to Plato, as we see in the Republic or Parmenides. What, then, could this mean? The fact was that abstract painting had its beauty, but this beauty was not similar to the classical one. Thus, at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century, art was obviously going through a process of \"profound becoming,\" or trans-figuration. Classical art seemed obsolete and a new style was triumphant. It was the end of a certain type of art. The new one was liberating itself from the old norms and principles. This liberation grew more powerful with the Dada movement. It was the most revolutionary artistic movement of the beginning of the twentieth century. It claimed the death of art (of \"classical\" art). Once free, it started to explore a lot of possibilities (technical perspectives and also ways to communicate its messages) which were unacceptable for normative art. Cubist art had already explored the collage technique, bringing into the artistic world certain parts of contingent reality (small sheets of journals, parts of tissues, some raw materials such as sand, etc.) which were incorporated into the painting itself. Dada art took a huge step forward when Marcel Duchamp exhibited objects produced industrially. He exhibited such objects as a bottle rack and a snow shovel, which he named ready-mades. 172 Mihaela Pop M. Duchamp Bottle Rack Playing Chess Bike Wheel Bringing such objects into an art exhibition2 was a real declaration of war against all the \"classical\" principles of the artistic world: the opposition between the uniqueness of the work of art and serial industrial production was now contradicted. And how could such a common thing be artistically appreciated? Where was the artist's contribution? What could be the significance of such an object in the artistic world? How can we understand the meaning of the material used by the artist in such a work? These were only a few questions arising from such a tremendous change. One could say that the admittance of the most commonplace physical object into the art world should be interpreted as \"reductiveness,\" driving toward the \"reification of art.\" Rosalind Krauss insisted on this idea3, using some earlier studies written by Clement Greenberg, especially The Crisis of Easel Painting (1948). From the Dada movement onwards, art was obviously completely different from what it had formerly been. And the same questions arose: what was the place of beauty in this new art? Could such works still be considered beautiful? How? In our opinion, in order to answer to these questions, we have to see if this kind of beauty meets the \"classical\" criteria or not. And how could we define it, in the second situation? Kant tells us4 that beauty is based on aesthetic satisfaction. But this kind of satisfaction differs from the moral one, which is earned through good behavior, and differs also from simple sensory pleasure. Aesthetic satisfaction is based on the fact that, even if it is not an objective judgment, like the philosophical one, it is still a judgment, a reflective one, tending toward universality. We have to remember that Kant spoke about the antinomy of taste. In his thesis, Kant says that the judgment of taste is not 2 It was the art exhibition organized at the Grand Central Palace in New York, on April 9, 1917. 3 Rosalind Krauss, \"A Voyage on the North Sea\" – Art in the Age of the Post-Medium Condition (London: Thames & Hudson, 1999), pp. 57-58. 4 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, transl. by J.C. Meredith (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952), pp. 206-208. Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 173 based upon concepts, for if it were, it would be open to dispute. Then the antithesis follows: the judgment of taste is based upon concepts, for otherwise, despite the diversity of aesthetic judgment, there could be no room even for contention. Thus, we have here the aesthetic judgment of beauty, which is a noncognitive and subjective judgment, but which is still a judgment. And this is possible because this judgment of taste belongs to the reason, to the regulative rational idea, and this makes possible the tendency toward universality, a tendency which is specific to the judgment of what is beautiful. Kant speaks about the sensus communis, a subjective principle which determines what pleases or displeases only by feeling and not by concepts, but yet with universal validity. The faculty of taste is in fact the product of reconciliation between what Kant calls the \"aesthetic inexponible idea\" (it is not theoretically established) and the \"rational indemonstrable idea\" (which cannot be shown to the senses). Thus, the faculty of taste ought to be supposed to be the endowment of every human being. Nicolai Hartmann tells us in his Aesthetics5 about an entire process of artistic creativity. It supposes the idea of using both a material (an unworked physical support) and a spiritual medium belonging to the artist's cultural identity. These two elements or components (one material and the other spiritual) are put together in order to work in a process which should assure the appearance of, or the fact of getting concreteness of, what was initially only a mental image – the creative idea. In this process of showing up, the work of art becomes a reality, rising from the inside of the artist's mind. That is why the work consists not only of a single layer, the material one, but also of many other layers, more profound or more general (abstract), containing the artist's ideas. This vision is reactivated by Krauss, who speaks about the \"flatness\" of this first layer. At this level, the other deeper layers can reveal or show themselves. Thus the work of art is a \"recursive structure,\" a multi-layered construction. \"It is something made, not given, something which is able to specify itself.\"6 The creation of such a structure supposes a particular effort of rational thinking. Aesthetic satisfaction will be obtained when the spectator is able to get a comprehensive vision of this entire creative journey made by the artist. In his Theory of Formativity7, Luigi Pareyson pointed also to the role of rational contribution to the artistic work. He proved that the work of art is not only something made, but something creative by its very nature. Works of art should be considered not only as formata, but also as formans. Pareyson wanted to emphasize that the work of art, after being produced by 5 Nicolai Hartmann, Estetica (Aesthetics) (Bucureşti: Univers, 1974), pp. 124-135. 6 R. Krauss, op.cit., p. 61. 7 Luigi Pareyson, Estetica. Teoria formativităţii (Aesthetics. Theory of Formativity) (Bucureşti: Univers, 1977), pp. 93-183. 174 Mihaela Pop the artist's creativity, can generate by itself new ideas in the spectator's mind. The process is based on the supposition that the spectator has an aesthetic satisfaction, which stimulates him to develop certain suggestions generated by the work itself. Liviu Rusu, a Romanian philosopher who lived during the second half of the twentieth century, pleaded in favor of the same theory.8 He insisted on the idea that the concept of beauty ought to be understood in a wider meaning. The creative process is very complex. Even if the result could seem chaotic to the eyes of a less attentive spectator, artistic thinking has its inner logic, conferring to the artistic product a specific order and structure. Even in a work praising the complete hazard, there is a certain intention, joining together the apparently chaotic elements. It is precisely this order that gives beauty to the work. And this order is due to the use of certain \"logic\" of composition within the creative process. In fact, Marcel Duchamp said that \"choice is the main thing in art\"9; the choice means a rational activity. There are in fact today two major directions in the art world as Thierry de Duve already proved. One is based on Clement Greenberg's theory claiming that aesthetic value, the judgment of beauty, is based on feelings: \"Aesthetic value, aesthetic quality, can be said to elicit satisfaction or dissatisfaction (which is) 'verdict of taste'.\"10 The second theory, corresponding to Kant's antithesis, belongs to Joseph Kosuth. He claims that \"all art (after Duchamp) is conceptual in nature because art exists conceptually.\"11 Arthur Danto mentions12 a specific distinction separating a work of art from a common object, even if they look similar. He holds up the Warhol's Brillo Box and the cartons of the Brillo product as an example.13 8 Liviu Rusu, Logica frumosului ( (The Logic of Beauty) (București: Editura pentru Literatură Universală, 1968) and also Eseu despre creaţia artistică. Contribuţie la o estetică dinamică (Essay on Artistic Creativity. Contribution to Dynamic Aesthetics) (Bucureşti: Editura ştiinţifică şi enciclopedică, 1989). 9 In an interview with Georges Charbonnier, RTF, 1961, see Thierry de Duve, Kant after Duchamp (Cambridge, Massachusetts, London: The MIT Press, 1996), p. 161. 10Ibid, p. 258. 11 Joseph Kosuth, Art after Philosophy, Idea Art (New York: Dutton, 1973), p. 80. 12 Arthur Danto, The End of Art: A Philosophical Defense, www.jstore.org/Feb.9, 2006. 13 Arthur Danto, Beyond the Brillo Box: The Visual Arts in Post-Historical Perspective (The University of California Press, 1998). We have to mention that we used these terms which are specific to Danto's theory. They are present in all the works we quoted. Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 175 A. Warhol – Brillo Box Tomato Soup Three Coca-Cola Bottles This distinction is based on the fact that the artistic work has certain aboutness: it \"speaks\" about something more general, more abstract that the common object to which it might correspond; it has a meaning. Whatever we name it, \"aboutness\" or capacity to appear (to show itself), or \"formativity,\" or logic of beauty, it is obvious that the work of art is very different from the commonplace item that is later trans-figured, according to Danto.14 And the beauty of this transformation of the commonplace consists precisely in the creative process of trans-figuration itself. It is clear that contemporary art is more generic than and not as specific as it used to be. The painter has become artist, and painting was assimilated to a generic art. The classical concept of beauty was replaced by art. What used to be judged as beautiful is now judged as art. Clement Greenberg used to say that the aesthetic coincides with the artistic. \"This is art\" is the judgment that has already replaced the classical \"this is beautiful.\" But this does not mean that this proposition does not suppose aesthetic feeling and that this feeling includes not only the love of artistic products, but also aesthetic dissatisfaction, negative aesthetic feelings. It is clear that the concept of art is not a determined concept but a nondetermined idea of reason which cannot be demonstrated theoretically and cannot be shown empirically, but can be analogically exemplified by an object designated by the word \"this\" of the sentence \"this is art.\"15 Contemporary art has become an artistic expression of a theory-aboutart, or it could be considered Art as Idea. Referring to the Hegelian definition of historicity, Danto regards this new art as \"post-historical.\" Following Duchamp, art has reached its autonomy, acquiring the capacity to explore any possible way of expression. This is what Danto understands 14 Arthur Danto, The Transfiguration of the Commonplace: a Philosophy of Art, (Harvard University Press, 1981), After the End of Art: Contemporary Art and the Pale of History (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997); The Philosophical Disenfranchisemnet of Art (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986) (P.D.A.); Hegel's End-of-Art Thesis, 1999, www.wikipedia/arthurdanto/works/20dec.2011(H.E.A.). 15 Thierry de Duve, op.cit. p. 321. 176 Mihaela Pop by \"disenfranchisement\" of art and Harold Rosenberg by \"de-definition\" of art.16 It has reached its philosophical level, becoming a philosophical artistic meditation on its own condition, in other words, it has reached its self-consciousness. In the twentieth century, being an artist means to question the nature of art. It already implies an ontological approach. Marcel Broodthaers speaks also about a complete transformation of the artistic production into a branch of the culture industry. The role of the artist's rational contribution is more important. Even the sensitive layer is reduced to its abstract dimension. Joseph Kosuth pointed out this process of reduction. The essence in its Greek meaning (ousia) has become a medium, a spiritual and abstract art material. Thus painting, both as creative process and finished work of art, was turned inside out, becoming, especially in conceptual art, \"the generic category of art\" according to Kosuth.17 The spectator is attracted or has an artistic satisfaction when contemplating that type of art. What would contemplation mean in this case? – Especially an intellectual comprehensive process. Ted Cohen says that aesthetic satisfaction rises when the spectator discovers the artist's idea, that regulative idea which is not demonstrable.18 It is obvious, in Cohen's opinion, that the beauty of Duchamp's readymades is given by his creative idea of exhibiting a bike wheel or a shovel. Hence, the creative idea is the fundamental contribution of the artist, the beauty of the work consisting especially in the intellectual satisfaction the spectator feels. It is a \"phenomenological vector,\" as R. Krauss names it, and implies an organizational and connective process. Through this process, the artist reveals a world of meanings waiting the spectator to discover it. Thus, contemporary art is rather \"conceptual\" than perceptive. We could say, in agreement with the opinions mentioned above, that contemporary art has its beauty, and it has an intellectual connotation. Duchamp's Fountain is completely aesthetic being symbolically ethic and also artistically theoretic. Let's take two examples. A. Jackson Pollock (1912-1956) made a significant contribution to the disenfranchisement of postwar art. He put a strong accent upon the creative gesture, not on its result, as in the past. A new relationship became evident between the artist's body and the canvas. It generated a process of decentralization of the artist's ego. In the same time his dripping method raised an important issue: the problem of horizontality in painting. Until then, the painting was created in a vertical position and the image of the 16 Harold Rosenberg, The De-definition of art (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1972). 17 R. Krauss, op.cit., p. 67. 18 Ted Cohen, \"Notes on Metaphor,\" The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, vol. 34, nr. 3, 1976, pp. 249-259. Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 177 painting was also vertical. The change of the painting position or its rotation had high implications. J. Pollock – Dripping action J. Pollock –Untitled (Number Eight) In fact, verticality is a distinctive characteristic of the human being and it created, during the entire human evolution, a specific way of perceiving and understanding the world. It also generated a specific human representation of the world. In his Three Essays on Sexuality (1905) and Civilization and its Discontinuity (1930), Sigmund Freud analyzed the reorientation process affecting our unconscious life as a consequence of the vertical position of the human being. Due to this position, the human being can get a full perspective on any living thing or object around him, by comparison with the animals, which have a partial view. Thus, a process of sublimation of the libidinal energy takes place, supposing a diversion from erotic purposes to art. Or, the option for horizontality in painting could be understood as a de-construction of the basic human characteristics in order to create the opportunity for a new and different construction. This idea belongs to Georges Batailles who wanted to point out the fact that Dada artists and their followers were looking for new meanings and ways of artistic content and expression as Rosalind Krauss mentioned.19 Before Pollock, there were some others who experienced the horizontal vision. Cézanne did this in his Still Life with Fruit and Curtain. 19Rosalind Krauss, \"Horizontality\" in Formless (New York: Zone Books, 1997), pp. 93-103. 178 Mihaela Pop P. Cézanne – Still Life with Fruit and E. Degas – Dancer on the Stage Curtain We can see that the level of the floor is courageously verticalized. The objects seem to glide. The separation line between wall and floor disappeared. Then, in some of Degas' paintings, we can see how the vision has changed. The woman having a bath is seen from an upper point, as well as the ballet dancer at the end of her performance. Paul Valery was one of the critics who wrote about some of Degas' paintings in 1936. He thought that the purpose of this change was a new redistribution of light and thus, a study of light effects. A similar vision can be found in some of Matisse's paintings. The separation line between wall and floor almost doesn't exist anymore. H. Matisse-Still Life P. Picasso-Still Life with Chair Canning In his Still Life with Chair Caning (1912) Picasso also changed the position of the objects. Their position is rotated as if the objects would be seen from above. Duchamp and Giacometti explored this new position too. Andy Warhol also showed a certain interest in the horizontality of footsteps, especially in his paintings of 1961. Jackson Pollock explored horizontality, taking it to its limits. The creative process is strictly connected to horizontality and its consequences. The gestures are different and even gravity intervenes. It affects the way the Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 179 colors are sprayed on the canvas. The viscosity of the color also affects its spreading out and the quantity of color absorbed into the canvas. According to Krauss,20 Pollock's intention was to oppose the form (which supposes order and thus culture, in a wider scope of understanding) to the unconscious level of our psychic life and thus, to oppose the vertical to the horizontal position, dominated by the lack of order and chaotic movements. Pollock lays his canvas on the floor. In his Full Fathom Five (1947), he creates a drip and encrusted surface, containing different types of garbage: sand, broken glass, burned matches, and tacks. J. Pollock – Full Fathom Five J. Pollock – Time is Art The allusion to the lower existence of used and consumed objects is evident, all being now reduced to horizontality or the equality of the garbage. But these remains are revalorized and sublimated by the elegance of the title which comes directly from Shakespeare's Tempest.21 Robert Morris named this option for horizontality an anti-form option.22 If the vertical form is well built as it stands against gravity, horizontality supposes the un-constructed, the anti-form because gravity acts as a force that deconstructs any structure. If we look at Pollock's paintings, they make a strong impression on our eyes. It is generated by the combination of colors and especially by the continuous and chaotic movement of the lines. In fact, Pollock seems to have set free the line and the color from any bondage. And due to this characteristic, Pollock could be considered a painter who developed Kandinsky's and Klee's ideas. 20 R. Krauss, Horizontality, in Formless, pp. 93-103 21William Shakespeare, The Complete Works, The Tempest (Glasgow: Geddes & Grosset, 2010); \"Full fathom five thy father lies/ Of his bones are coral made/ Those are pearls that were his eyes\" (Ariel's song in Act I, scene 2, verses 398-400). 22 According to R. Krauss, op.cit., p. 97. 180 Mihaela Pop B. Joseph Beuys (1921-1986) is a German artist known for works belonging to a wide scope of contemporary artistic expressions: performance, installations, and graphics. He was one of the prestigious artists belonging to the Fluxus movement in Europe. Beuys was also a professor who taught the new artistic concepts. His theory was based on a humanistic approach, social philosophy and anthroposophy (especially, Rudolf Steiner's thought). Beuys developed an extended definition of art (\"each human being is an artist\") and used the idea of \"social sculpture\" or social shaping encouraging creativity: \"power to imagination!\" Thus he was considered an artist who perpetuated the old tradition of German Romanticism. He played a significant role in the development of a social way of thinking and in the shaping of the political thought of the German people between 1960 and 1980. He was the founder of the Organization for Direct Democracy (1972) and of the Student's Party in Dusseldorf in 1967. Many of his ideas have been developed, especially within American cultural life. He wanted to make people understand the role of forms, and objects' appearance. Thus he organized artistic workshops where students were taught to think in a broad manner, perceiving the connection between art and life. He thought that the artist should have a wide experience of all types of forms. For one of his workshops, gathering students and nonspecialized people interested in art, he used tree branches brought from the forest.23 He put them onto the floor in various positions analyzing the optical effects resulting from those positionings and the relations connecting each element to the others (which branches of the composition acquired significance in certain positioning and which could be eliminated without affecting the entire composition). He discovered that the limitation to a minimum number of elements did not diminish the multitude of meanings of the entire work as a whole. On the contrary, he observed that the energy and the forces generated by the relations between the elements seemed to be more intense. And the forces seemed also to differ in intensity. Beuys admitted that this approach could be considered an application of Kandinsky's and Klee's writings on the study of fundamental forms and their polarity. He used these abstractionist theories in order to create compositions with commonplace objects (branches, sticks, iron sticks of different lengths and thicknesses, etc.), not with abstract, geometric elements. The Shaping Problem Beuys thought that art is a domain that belongs to all life phenomena. It is influenced by the movement that he perceived in its Aristotelian 23 Harlan Volker, Ce este arta? Discutie-atelier cu Joseph Beuys (What is Art? A Workshop-Discussion with Joseph Beuys) (Cluj Napoca: Ideea Design & Print, 2003). Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 181 meanings. According to one of these meanings, movement is seen as a continuous becoming, a qualitative and quantitative process, positive or negative, evolutionary or destructive. The artist mentions that his \"objects\" (he doesn't designate them as works of art) stimulate the desire to change – the significance of the word plastics. This word acquires, in his interpretation, various meanings. It comes from the Greek word euplastia meaning a correct and beautiful shaping. This notion helps us to understand how to shape our ideas and how to express them as harmonically as possible through words. Thus, even a social shaping process could be achieved, helping us to shape our world. It is obvious that it could be considered utopian in this meaning, for the process supposes an evolution. Through this process, any man can become an artist. But this process never ends as it supposes a permanent transformation. We can notice that Beuys proposes a new positioning of the art within the living world; he perceives art from a radically extended perspective. Even if the work of art reaches a final form, in Beuys opinion, it is only a temporary result. Beyond this form, there is a permanent development within living nature. According to Beuys, that is the reason why the art is always moving toward something, it cannot reach the final perfection, corresponding to all possible determinations of the universal spirit. We could consider this idea as a reply to the Hegelian notion of end of art. It is a vitalist vision. \"Art is something alive, it is a fragmentary impulse,\" according to Beuys.24 The Honey Pump This is one of Beuys' installations. The work is composed of many elements and is situated in various locations. In a hall, there is the pump symbolizing the center of knowledge and thought, and also of the organic life – the heart. The system of cables and wires spreading from the center toward the other locations could symbolize the circulatory system in different meanings (blood circulation, knowledge circulation through media, and also, money circulation within the world's economic system). J. Beuys – Batteries and fat Honey pump and motors System of cables and wires 24 Ibid,, p. 57. 182 Mihaela Pop Another element of the installation is the fat. It is a symbol of the energetic substances. There are also two motors connected to a thick cylinder of copper where the fat is melted down. The heat generated by the two motors and the rotating movement of the fat mixing device insures its liquefaction. Thus, the process suggests, on one side, the idea of plasticity or well shaping is necessary to the production of a work of art, but, on the other hand, this process of energy production is necessary to any human activity. This action suggests not only the process of transformation but also the will to act. Thus, the work can be considered as a symbolic answer to the question: What is a human being? We can see that the artist looks for the deepest universal meaning in any object or assembly he designs. The commonplace materials are articulated in such a manner that they could become revealing metaphors. Thinking in a vitalist way, the artist mentions the necessity for polarities. On one side, the form could be obtained through cooling or crystallization (chemical and physical processes) and, on the other side, through the dynamism of the inner transformations. Beuys remarks that, if we take nature into consideration, things evolve impelled by their inner sides, as the honey comb, the bird's nest, or the development of the tree trunk. The river stones are shaped from the outside by water, and quartz crystals have a certain regular disposition resulting from a process of crystallization. The artist thinks that, in the case of art works, there is a similar necessity to perceive them from the inner side of the creative process. This understanding is not limited to the disposition of its elements. It also assures a good communication between people and nature. That is why the agriculture should not be considered only a mere activity of subordinating nature to human purposes. It should be seen as an artistic issue, responsible for shaping the relations between people and nature. And the artist should fulfill the purposes of nature and should not damage it. This idea is also promoted by the land art artists. We can see that euplastia (beautiful shaping) is a fundamental theme for Beuys. Its role is to achieve a spiritual shaping of the artist within the process of artistic creation and, at the same time, shape the medium he uses. In this way, the artist becomes a demiurge (demiourgos) but a different kind of demiurge than the Platonic Demiurgos from Timaeus. In Beuys' vision, the artist is a craftsman who gives shape not only to the works he creates but also to his spirit. Beuys seems here to apply the theory developed by Luigi Pareyson which we have already mentioned above. There is another problem which the artist should be able to solve. When should the process of artistic creation end up? Or, when can the artist decide that he finished his work? Beuys says: \"I should start from the object itself according to its dynamics;\"25 \"I have to take into consideration the material and the process.\"26 Thus, in Beuys' opinion, it is not the artist but 25 Op.cit. p. 35. 26 Ibid., p. 36. Beauty as an Aesthetic Value: Contemporary Challenges 183 the material that decides when the artistic process is finished. \"I try to understand what they want from themselves, the wood, or the stone.\"27 The artist remarks that the Avant-gardes decided to abandon the Renaissance principle of mimesis in order to make possible the discovery of the fundamental intention of each material. It was thought that only in this way could the work of art reach its absolute beauty and value. \"The table should be as beautiful as a temple because it should be a living thing. If it is not good, it is like a sick animal.\"28 What could this mean? The material and the form should \"fit,\" should \"be in harmony with one another.\" Only in this way can the work be self-sufficient, according to the Kantian theory. This is precisely the characteristic of the Greek temple but also that of the olive tree near it, says Beuys, as this harmony implies a trans-figuration of nature into art, as well as the art reflects itself (in its very essence) on the entire surrounding nature. This harmony is not only the prerogative of the ancient arts, according to Beuys. The Coca-Cola bottle can be an example of the same idea of harmony for the contemporary society and art. Beuys perceives in the shape of the bottle, in its ribs, its neck, its solid and elegant basis, in its thin wavelike writing, an assembly that should be considered a metaphor of vitality, of energies flowing upward and downward within a living organism. In the same way, the car, \"the most beloved child of the twentieth century,\"29 is also \"the most shaped and polished contemporary object.\" And Beuys adds with a certain melancholy: if a politic idea had been so much shaped and \"polished,\" mankind would probably have an amazing evolution. Along the same lines, agriculture should be seen as a work of art. It should take into consideration the minerals that plants extract from the soil and store afterward in their vegetal structure. Similarly, art should understand the essence of the materials it uses. The artist is convinced that art could contribute to a new culture. Unfortunately, nowadays, the meaning of freedom is distorted, according to each one's considerations, as everyone has a different perspective on it. In order to achieve true freedom, responsible freedom, it is necessary to understand its meaning. Free thinking implies will and responsibility. Thus the meaning of freedom refers to the creation of an entire world. *** In our opinion, beauty, according to its aesthetic meanings, is still present in contemporary art, but has profoundly changed its characteristics. Aesthetic satisfaction is also still present, but it is based especially on the rational contribution, as the work of art seems to attract mostly by its intellectual allusions. This is, in fact, the beauty of our times, founded on a vast culture and civilization surrounding us through any object we use. 27 Ibid., p.41. 28 Ibid., p. 42. 29 Ibid., p. 57. 184 Mihaela Pop Contemporary art is indeed a new art having wider meanings, as we tried to illustrate by the examples above. The beauty of this art should then correspond to this diversity of meanings. One could say that this might cause a sort of dissipation or evanescence of the artistic phenomena. In our opinion, on the contrary, this wide variety of artistic expressions is in fact the product of our contemporary mentality and it significantly contributes to a better understanding of the world in which we live. Faculty of Philosophy University of Bucharest Bucharest, Romania pop.mihaela.a@gmail.com CHAPTER XIV WHAT KITSCH TELLS US ABOUT OUR TIME ULRICH STEINVORTH Abstract: There has always been kitsch: things that were to sweeten bitter reality. But in modern societies, kitsch plays an additional role that it did not play before the nineteenth century. Theorists disagree whether kitsch indicates political decay. That it does was the prevailing view in the first half of the twentieth century, but today the stern critique of kitsch is considered rather pathological. Discussing views of Kulka, Kundera, Saul Friedlander, Adolf Loos, and Kant, I argue for the older evaluation. My first thesis is that kitsch is an illusionary form of autonomy preventing autonomy. It is the new opium for the people. It is not the product of manipulation, but satisfies a specifically modern demand. My second thesis is that the way kitsch produces the illusion of autonomy consists in the fact that the buyer and user of kitsch objects is led in his choice by strong emotions. When he follows them he believes he is following authentic nature rather than uncivilized nature. Lack of judgment and civilization favor susceptibility to kitsch. This quality allows kitsch to become a global attitude uniting individuals in their undifferentiating responses to strong emotional stimuli. Nonetheless, this is my third thesis: kitsch is not inescapable. Contemporary societies seduce individuals not only into using the opium of kitsch but also require of them initiative and creative activity, with which kitsch is incompatible. The more initiative individuals use, the less they are in need of kitsch, for they then have to attend more to stimuli, to differentiate between them, and to abandon the uncivilized responses that make them susceptible to kitsch. The organizers of the Nazi movement knew well enough that they would thrive if they made the masses believe in their autonomy by staging mass mobilizing events that would underchallenge rational capabilities and yet suggest having the applause of all naturally feeling mankind. Contemporary election campaigns in Western democracies and mass events such as the Olympics or Church World Congresses do not differ in this respect. Kitsch has become a means of communication even for those who do not want to deceive. It would be a first success of reflection about kitsch if they stopped using kitsch. By understanding kitsch as a political rather than an aesthetic phenomenon, we can explain two conspicuous facts about kitsch. First, a word to refer to the phenomenon came into use only in the 1860s, when art dealers and artists in Munich called the \"cheap artistic stuff\" bought by the 186 Ulrich Steinvorth nouveaux riches \"kitsch.\"1 Second, the phenomenon has become an allpervading ideological culture soaking our feeling, thinking, and acting. These facts cannot be explained by the prevailing aesthetic understanding of kitsch. According to the aesthetic understanding, kitsch is a reality sweetener rather than a reality contact reducer, or it is a product of bad taste. The aesthetic understanding can explain kitsch as a phenomenon that is shared by modern and pre-modern societies, but fails to explain the specifically modern role of kitsch. Moreover, although it is an aesthetic understanding, it cannot solve problems of the aesthetics of music and architecture: how so-called serious music can be kitsch and why not all ornament is a crime. Yet surprisingly, the political understanding of kitsch I propose can solve these problems. Keywords: kitsch, reality sweetener, aesthetic phenomenon, politic phenomenon, bad taste. There has always been kitsch; things that were to sweeten bitter reality. Yet in the nineteenth century, kitsch began to play a new role. Without anyone's intention it became a political tool used without regard to the consequences. Kitsch is no longer the innocent reality sweetener it may have been at earlier times. This is what I'll argue for. DEFINITIONS OF KITSCH Kitsch has become too conspicuous not to become an object of analysis and controversy. It is controversial as to whether it indicates political and intellectual decay. This view prevailed in the first half of the twentieth century,2 but today, the stern critique of kitsch is suspected of being pathological. 3 Kitsch is defended as a reality sweetener not reducing reality contact, even as necessary to soften the inescapable hardship of modernity. I argue for the older evaluation. Modern kitsch is the new opium disabling the reality contact necessary for rational action. 1 Matei Călinescu, Faces of Modernity (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1977), p. 234. 2 Cp. Hermann Broch, Geist and Zeitgeist: The Spirit in an Unspiritual Age (Berkeley, CA.: Counterpoint, 2003); Theodor Adorno, The Culture Industry (London: Routledge, 2001); Walter Benjamin, The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction, in Hannah Arendt, ed., Illuminations (New York: Harcourt, 1968). This line lives on in Karlheinz Deschner, Kitsch, Konvention und Kunst (Frankfurt: Ullstein, 1991), pp. 23-38, and Hans-Dieter Gelfert, Was ist Kitsch? (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck, 2000). 3 An example is Konrad Paul Liessmann, \"Kitsch und Kult. Jenseits von Gut und Böse,\" Neue Zürcher Zeitung Folio 12/03, diagnosing the critique of kitsch as a \"pathological chromophoby\": \"With kitsch we retrieve what modernism refuses us: the allure, the sentiment, the gaudy and the small happiness.\" (My transl.) What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 187 It is uncontroversial that kitsch has become conspicuously rampant. As Tomas Kulka, the author of perhaps the most systematic essay on kitsch, states: Whether kitsch began at some point in recent history, or whether it is as old as art itself, one thing is beyond dispute: Kitsch has become an integral part of our modern culture, and it is flourishing now more than ever before. You find it everywhere. It welcomes you to the restaurant, greets you in the bank, and smiles at you from advertising billboards, as well as from the walls of your dentist's waiting room. The phenomenal success of Dallas and Dynasty seems already to have vindicated Milan Kundera's prophetic dictum that the 'brotherhood of men on earth will be possible only on the base of kitsch'.4 As another author aptly remarked: If Martians were to take a cool look at the world they might well re-name it Kitsch. 5 This conspicuous fact provokes Kulka's question: Milan Kundera exposed kitsch as a main instrument for the manipulation of the masses by Communist regimes, while Saul Friedländer showed how central a role it played in the mobilization of the masses in Hitler's Germany. However, the question of how kitsch performs such wonders, as well as the question of what its appeal consists of...has not been fully answered.6 Curiously though, Kulka claims the questions he points to are \"essentially questions of aesthetics.\"7 True, if we call something kitsch we imply a negative aesthetic judgment, ascribing to the object's lover, whether or not she calls it kitsch, bad taste or a lack of aesthetic sense. Yet this does not imply that aesthetics can answer what the appeal of presently 4 Tomas Kulka, Kitsch and Art (Pennsylvania State University Press, 1996), p. 16. The quote is from Kundera's novel The Unbearable Lightness of Being (New York: Harper, 1984), p. 251. 5 Jacques Sternberg, Kitsch (London: Academy Ed., 1972); from Kulka loc.cit. p. 17. I could not find the quote in the book, which in fact indulges in porno kitsch. 6 Kulka loc.cit. p. 17. The reference to Kundera is to his Unbearable Lightness, p. 251; that to Friedländer to his Reflections of Nazism: Essay on Kitsch and Death (New York: Harper, 1984). 7 Kulka loc.cit., p. 7. 188 Ulrich Steinvorth rampant kitsch consists of. The typical kitsch objects, however, do suggest the prevailing non-historical understanding of kitsch as innocent reality sweetener. As Kulka lists such objects, they are pictures of puppies and kittens,...mothers with babies,...beaches with palms and colorful sunsets, pastoral Swiss villages,... pasturing deer,...wild horses,...cheerful beggars, sad clowns, sad faithful old dogs.8 No doubt, many kitsch objects do sweeten reality. There is also kitsch, such as flashy wear or gaudy makeup that presents something as not sweeter but rather more shocking or \"sourer\" than it is.9 Kulka would accept this. What he rejects is that to understand contemporary kitsch we need to go beyond aesthetics. In fact, kitsch objects, whether sweet or sour, look innocent. If the Nazis used them to manipulate the masses, it's not the fault of kitsch, Kulka would say; kitsch results from bad taste, and we need to define good taste both to tell kitsch and art apart and to prevent its misuse. I call this understanding of kitsch its soft understanding: (SK) Kitsch is nothing but a product of bad taste. In contrast, I claim we need not know the difference between kitsch and art to understand what makes kitsch rampant today. We need to know the quality of kitsch, whether it is aesthetic or not, that allows social conditions to render it rampant. Yet let's first look at Kulka's approach. Kulka uses the notions of unity, complexity, and intensity as the criteria of art and its quality to define good taste and to demarcate art from kitsch.10 His problem is whether the explicated notions of unity, 8 Ibid., p. 26. 9 On sweet and sour (and more forms of) kitsch cp. Gelfert, Was ist Kitsch? (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck, 2000); H.E. Holthusen, \"Über den sauren Kitsch,\" in Ja und Nein (Munich: Piper, 1954); Matei Calinescu, Faces of Modernity (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1977), p. 236. 10 Kulka ibid., p. 46, draws \"on the time-honored theories of Plato and Aristotle, which were refined by medieval church philosophers\" and by Monroe Beardsley and George Dickie; M.C. Deardsley, Aesthetics (New York: Harcourt, 1958); G. Dickie, Evaluating Art (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988). Kulka defines unity by the number a of alterations of a work W that cause \"some aesthetic damage to W\" minus the number b of alterations that \"aesthetically (improve) W\"; hence as a-b. He defines complexity by the additions of a, b and the number c of alterations that do \"not aesthetically affect W\"; hence as a+b+c; and intensity as the rate of improving and worsening alterations (a+b) to the number of alterations without any aesthetic effect (c); hence as (a+b)/c. Finally, he stipulates that the \"overall aesthetic value of a work of art\" is indicated by the multiplication of the values of unity, complexity and intensity; thus, the formula \"(a-b) x (a+b+c) x (a+b)/c\" is the What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 189 complexity, and intensity do distinguish art from kitsch. He thinks they do, because he denies kitsch the quality of intensity. His explanation of intensity requires that a work is sensitive to alterations, such that the rate of worsening and improving alterations (a+b) to the number of alterations without aesthetic effect (c) is high. In contrast, \"Kitsch pictures can be subjected to many alterations without turning out either better or worse.\" 11 He concludes: In kitsch paintings, unlike in real art, what is represented is more important than how it is rendered. The what overshadows the how. 12 However, kitsch paintings such as Disney figures are very sensitive to alterations. There is hardly a trait in them alterable without aesthetic effect; hence c is small and intensity high. As Kulka says himself, the painter of a kitsch work should avoid all unpleasant or disturbing features of reality, leaving us only with those we can easily cope with and identify with.13 Paint the kitten a little too spiteful, the child a little too malicious, the garden gnome too ugly, and their kitsch quality sinks. Disney figures need hardly less craftsmanship than art works do. Moreover, the what can be important in art too.14 Speaking of the what that overshadows the how in kitsch, Kulka may have thought of the fact that unlike art, kitsch produces feelings that do not allow differentiating, but if so, his description is misleading. The conclusion to draw is that we cannot distinguish kitsch from art by formal aesthetic qualities or by bad and good taste. aesthetic value of a work of art (ibid., pp. 68-71). As Kulka emphasizes, \"The proposed model should be seen as a suggestion for a rational reconstruction of our aesthetic value judgments,\" not implying that \"that we actually do, or should, form our aesthetic judgments by making calculations\" (ibid., p. 72, n. 34). 11 Kulka ibid., p. 73. 12 Kulka loc.cit., p. 80. 13 Ibid., p. 27. 14 In his assigning the what to kitsch and the how to art, Kulka seems to follow the most influential post-World War II art critic Clement Greenberg (who certainly expressed a general \"pro-abstract\" tendency of this time). This assignment is convincingly rejected by Noel Carroll, A Philosophy of Mass Art (Oxford: Clarendon, 1998), 31ff. 190 Ulrich Steinvorth As an art critic remarked, \"With regard to the norms of art there is nothing wrong with kitsch.\"15 Kitsch requires skill and judgment no less than art. Yet they do require different kinds of skill and judgment. What makes the difference? Kulka has no answer to this question. However, rather than dropping SK we might drop Kulka's explanation of bad taste and look for another defense. Here is an alternative. Think of gaudy make-up; or of a souvenir such as Rodin's Thinker, doubled, the backs flattened and used as bookends,16 or of a memory stick, marbled and in the form of a cross. They make us laugh, and why? Because they are cases of doing something at the wrong place which is right at the place where it belongs. Such misplacement is the essence of both bad taste and kitsch. The cross has its home at some higher place of a wall, not in a laptop; Rodin's Thinker is for a public place, not for stabilizing book rows; gaudy make-up is fine in a circus, not at an ordinary public place; fluffy cat and wild horse pictures as well as Donald Duck are right for children, but wrong for adults; buying a plastic replica of the Cathedral of Florence is to remember our tour but not to present beauty. Bad taste is not a lack of knowledge or morality but a lack of a sense, loaded with experience, of when and where to apply one's factual or moral knowledge. Thus we can also explain why kitsch is felt as pretense and ostentation, as fake, hypocrisy, and parasitic on art:17 it pretends that a misplaced behavior is right. The big problem with this defense as with any other defense of SK is that it cannot explain why kitsch has become rampant. There has always been misplaced behavior, as there has always been bad taste, but these facts did not make kitsch the dominating phenomenon it is today. Moreover, there are more problems with SK that show up if we have a closer look at kitsch objects. It seems obvious that what makes objects kitschy is their sweetening, or in another word, adulterating style of presenting reality and the implicit claim that reality is lovely, lively, or at least more interesting and acceptable than it is. If there are poverty and old age, cheerful beggars and faithful old dogs witness that basically reality is fine. The novelist Kundera follows this idea of kitsch when he ascribes to kitsch a \"categorical agreement with being.\" He even assimilates the conflict between kitsch friends and kitsch enemies to that between those who believe that the world was created by God and those who think it came into being of its own accord...Kitsch is the 15 Harold Rosenberg, The Tradition of the New (New York: MacGrawHill 1965), p. 266. 16 I take this example and the following one of the plastic replica from Kulka 81f. 17 Cp. Gillo Dorfles, Kitsch: The World of Bad Taste (New York: Universe Books, 1969) (tr. from the 1968 Italian version, Il Kitsch), 12; Calinescu, 229, Kulka, p. 80. What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 191 absolute denial of shit, in both the literal and figurative sense of the word; kitsch excludes everything from its purview that is essentially unacceptable in human existence.18 Yet if believers believe in God, they do not necessarily agree with being, as they often also believe in the devil and do not agree with evil. And think of Alexander Pope's great verse: And spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite, One truth is clear, Whatever is, is right. 19 If something categorically agrees with being, these lines do; but I wonder if Kundera would call them kitsch. They are not. They show we can categorically agree with being without sweetening reality, as they imply the rigor of rejecting the human inclination to blame their own faults on the world. They would be kitschy only if they yielded to this inclination and ended with the words \"Whate'er we do, is right.\" Can't we nonetheless stick to SK and argue that what makes something kitsch is not its sweetening or adulterating any part of reality but only our actions? The problem is that fluffy kitten pictures seem to imply not that whatever we do is right but that the kittens are right. Yet, as Pope declaring \"whatever is, is right\" shows, the mere presenting of something as right cannot become the kitsch factor. What then makes a presentation kitschy, if it is neither the presentation as right nor the presentation of our actions as right? What we are left with is a presentation that produces in us feelings we indulge in. In fact, whether we like it or not, if we look at kittens, they produce in us strong positive emotions. We can reject or indulge in them. If we indulge, it seems we use the kitten pictures as kitsch; if we reject the feeling the pictures trigger, we resist the attraction of kitsch. So can we say that kitsch is an object made to trigger emotions in which we may indulge? No, since pornographic objects are also made to trigger feelings we indulge in and yet they are not necessarily kitsch. Worse, many if not all works of art are made to produce feelings in us that we indulge in without indulging in kitsch. Otherwise Sophocles' Antigone, which is said to have caused the Athenians to indulge in crying for a week, would be kitsch. It seems we need to qualify the feelings indulging in which is kitsch. Here Kundera, despite his mistaken starting point, seems to hit on the right quality: Kitsch causes two tears to flow in quick succession. The first tear says: How nice to see children running on the grass! The second tear says: How nice to be moved, together with all mankind, by 18 Kundera, The Unbearable Lightness, 247f; from Kulka 95f. 19 Alexander Pope, Essay on Man, End of First Epistle. 192 Ulrich Steinvorth children running on the grass! It is the second tear that makes kitsch kitsch.20 Kitsch can cause not only two tears but also two laughs or smiles or admiring wows. Kundera's point is that a presentation is kitschy if and only if it is made to produce feelings we indulge in because we think we feel as all mankind does. First tears, or laughs, or wows, are right. Second tears are wrong because in them we feel not for the specific reason for which the feeling would be right, as when the Athenians admire Antigone's steadfastness, but for its presumed agreement with mankind. Second tears drown the first tears. Indulging in a feeling for its agreement with mankind prevents us from attending to the reasons of our first tears, and reduces us to enjoying only our feeling rather than responding, by our emotion, to the facts that deserve our emotion. Indulging in a feeling for the facts that deserve our emotion is a case of exploring reality by our feeling and of doing something for its sake. In contrast, indulging in a feeling for its agreement with mankind is a case of doing something only for our pleasure.21 Understanding kitsch as producing a second tear or emotion by which we think of our agreement with mankind allows us to understand some peculiarities of kitsch. We may wonder why the picture of fluffy kittens or a sunset is kitsch, while real fluffy kittens or a sunset that look exactly like the pictures are not. Similarly, a Gothic cathedral is often great art, but the same cathedral rebuilt in our time is felt to be kitschy. The reason is the picture or copy is made to trigger not only a first emotion but a second one that indulges in our agreement with mankind. Similarly, a child or youth who the first time sees a picture we regard as kitschy and enthuses over it is pardoned for his misjudgment, because we assume he indulges in it only for the first tear. However, we should add to or explicate Kundera's description of the second tear, stating that it is a reference not necessarily to a given in mankind, but to a presumed one that the kitsch producer may only feign. We might even describe rhetoric by its reference to a suggested feeling of mankind and thus explain why philosophers become kitschy when they use rhetoric rather than argument. Recognizing the second-tear-triggering property as the constitutive property of kitsch allows us to explain another specificity of kitsch. Indulgence in kitsch is often felt as a protest against rules that check and channel our responses. Civilization channels our immediate responses, expecting us not to blurt them out but to have regard to the sensibilities of others. Unlike cattle and barbarians, we should know how to control ourselves. In contrast, kitsch objects invite us to respond uninhibitedly to 20 Kundera, Unbearable Lightness loc. cit., p. 251; from Kulka, p. 27. 21 Kundera's \"second tear\" can distinguish kitsch from both mass art and Avant-garde art as defined by Noel Carroll, Philosophy of Mass Art, pp. 185211. What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 193 strong feelings, such as rapture at the cuteness of kittens and the pathos of sunsets. We can be sure that everyone has such feelings; otherwise they would lack the strength that makes them the feelings that kitsch objects trigger. This is why indulging in them is also indulgence in our conformity to mankind, and why kitsch objects replace the rules of civilization with the authority of strong feelings that we believe are common to mankind. In contrast, by explaining kitsch as bad taste, we take account only of the failure of kitsch to meet the standards of taste, and not of its implicit claim to be superior to the conventions of civilization. By its appeal to the natural feelings of mankind, kitsch unites people of the most different civilizations in a universal brotherhood. Yet it is a brotherhood only in the most primitive responses to blunt stimuli or raw nature, a brotherhood that can be as obtrusive as the uniting responses are elementary. Moreover, the raw nature that unites the global kitsch community is often only the pretense of human nature, since certain responses that in fact result from specific conditions, such as taking a cigarette or a drink after some strain, or taking offense at the behavior of a minority, can be hyped by kitsch producers so as to appear as the right response of all mankind. The crucial element in the second-tear-triggering property of kitsch that explains the rampancy of kitsch is not only that it confirms us in feeling like all mankind, but also that it pardons and even applauds underachievements and failures, such as that of the German bourgeoisie in 1848, if they are taken for a rebellion against the standards of art and civilization. Kitsch promises liberty for the price of abandoning standards of civilization. As we experience the tools' tyranny as civilization's tyranny, we are attracted to kitsch, taking it for a badge of liberation. Thus, kitsch has become rampant today. The suffering from the tools' tyranny and the evasive response to it by muddling through, rather than taking up the challenge, cry for a confirmation by the agreement with mankind. They make us eager to look for things that allow us to enjoy ourselves rather than what merits admiration; for if we think of what merits admiration, we'll not come off well. On the other hand, those who profit from the given conditions, interested in the prevalent evasive response to the tools' tyranny rather than in an autonomous society, will produce such confirmation as much as they can. We can be sure that under the given conditions, kitsch spreads like fire in a parched forest, as something people cry for and minorities kindle.22 22 As far as I see, except for Kundera, kitsch theorists have failed to understand this crucial property of kitsch and therefore end up with amazingly trivial or misleading descriptions of kitsch. Thus in explaining why kitsch is so popular, Adorno (\"On Popular Music,\" Studies in Philosophy and Social Science 9, 1941, p. 38; from Calinescu, p. 242) desperately states: \"People want to have fun. A fully concentrated and conscious experience of art is possible only to those whose lives do not put such a strain on them that in their spare 194 Ulrich Steinvorth There are, however, more sophisticated forms of kitsch that attract just because they demonstrate that the chooser of this form of kitsch differs from the rest. We find them in particular in forms that combine with fashion. They are interesting because they indicate that kitsch can turn from an obstacle into a motor of autonomy. Yet they are still obstacles because their autonomy is no less illusionary than that of ordinary kitsch. If my goal is to be just different from the rest, I remain dependent on the rest. Rather than my telling myself what I must do, the rest now tells me what I must not do. I will not take account of these forms of kitsch here, though. Now, am I (and Kundera) not moralistic and prejudiced against kitsch? Isn't what I depreciatingly call raw nature our real nature or a very important part of it? When I buy a poster of fluffy kittens, do I not follow my impulse rather than a rule of art or civilization that commands me to prefer a more artistic picture? Am I not entirely independent of what \"all mankind\" feels, as I follow only my impulse? So, isn't the claim of kitsch to liberate perfectly justified? True, actions are autonomous only if they are our actions, chosen by us and suiting us. Yet another condition of autonomy is that we deliberate about our actions, look for alternatives, ponder the pros and cons, and only then decide. But deliberation is the very thing kitsch cuts off. Kitsch invites us to follow the first strong impulse we feel when looking at it. True, in young people kitsch can have an emancipatory effect, as it can push them to trusting their own feeling. However, if the young do not learn to add deliberation to their self-confidence, they stick with deciding by their strongest impulse. Rather than becoming autonomous they become objects of manipulation of kitsch producers, who offer them the stimuli to which they will respond the way most people do, just because they are the stimuli most people spontaneously respond to in the same way. So they will judge their responses right because others are responding the same way. Their criterion of the rightness of a response is not whether it is adequate to the stimulus (they may even lose the concept of such adequacy) but whether it conforms to how other people respond. We now have sufficient reason to formulate the following lengthy explanation K of kitsch: time they want relief from both boredom and effort simultaneously. The whole sphere of cheap commercial entertainment reflects this dual desire.\" Why does this sphere produce just this special phenomenon of kitsch? There are many other ways to find relief from boredom without effort, such as riding a roller coaster or getting drunk. Calinescu, p. 244, even states: \"Cheap or expensive, kitsch is sociologically and psychologically the expression of a life style, namely, the life style of the bourgeoisie or the middle class\" and invents a \"principle of mediocrity.\" Yet the bourgeoisie did not incline to kitsch at all before the 19th century, and since then the non-bourgeois classes were no less fond of kitsch. What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 195 (K) Kitsch is an object producing feelings indulged in because their strength invites us to enjoy ourselves in what seems to be an autonomously chosen agreement with an alleged mankind, but is only the indulgence in an unavoidable response to stimuli too blunt as to allow a differentiated attention to reality and therefore preventing the reality contact necessary for autonomy. K does not exclude that kitsch sweetens reality or offends good taste, as the strong feelings a kitsch object triggers may be sweet and offending to good taste, but it contradicts SK, as it claims that kitsch is more than just a product of bad taste. K may define the kitsch of all times, but by describing the feelings kitsch produces, it allows explaining the historical role kitsch has acquired today; so we may call it a historical approach. Let's now have a look at its historical role. THE HISTORICAL ROLE OF KITSCH The word kitsch was introduced in the 1860s by art dealers and artists in Munich for \"cheap artistic stuff\" bought by the nouveaux riches.23 This was the time when the German bourgeoisie stopped reflecting the failed 1848 revolutions and looked for new goals, allowing them to forget about their failure. The historical coincidence of the German bourgeoisie's desire to wipe out their historical failure and the beginning of the career of the word kitsch may be a mere accident. Yet it is not too implausible to guess, either, that the Germans' susceptibility to kitsch was an effect of, or favored by, the humiliating defeat of 1848. Autonomy would have required of the German bourgeoisie to seize political power, as the English bourgeoisie had done two centuries earlier. The German bourgeoisie did have the power to impose its own order on Germany, but it submitted to a decaying aristocracy and its state institutions. While before 1848 it had cultivated the moderately authoritarian Biedermeier, this was no longer possible after its partial commitment to the 1848 revolutions. Now the bourgeois desired compensation for their 1848 failure by sticking to their ideal of autonomy, yet without risking another revolution. Enjoying kitsch allowed them to have an omelet without breaking an egg, to be radical in words and conservative in deeds. For kitsch invited them to follow their immediate strong and uncivilized impulses in responding to \"artistic stuff\" and to take their responses for acts of liberation by which they also showed their agreement with all true mankind not yet spoiled by the suppressing rules of feudal civilization. The artistic stuff of Munich art dealers found a fertile ground in novels, operas, dueling fraternities, and national celebrations Yet the failure of the German bourgeoisie that triggered the career of kitsch was only the last straw that broke a camel's back burdened by the 23 Călinescu, p. 234. 196 Ulrich Steinvorth tools' tyranny. Since all modern societies suffer from the tools' tyranny, and the failure of the German bourgeoisie was followed by similar failures of other classes in most other nations, kitsch spread. The price to pay for the comfort of kitsch, for indulging in sentiments that provide the illusion of autonomy and distract from deliberate actions, was reduced reality contact. Friends of kitsch become blind to alternatives and to the dangers of their conformism. The costs were billed by World War I and its consequences.24 If this explanation is true, we should expect that despite the prevalence of the soft understanding in theory, in practice kitsch is recognized as a means to assure us in our resignation into conditions that we criticize in words but accept in deeds. Kitsch could not become rampant without recognition of its function in practice. And it is thus recognized. Here is an example, a comment, titled Kitsch Rather Than Crisis, in a German weekly on the announcement that the English Prince William and his girlfriend Kate Middleton would marry in 2011: The British government is said to have rapped the tables, overjoyed, for minutes...Hardly could there have been a better present in a year when Britain has to implement the strictest austerity plans of the recent past. In such a time some kitsch feels good. And since the crisis will be very hard indeed, some more kitsch will feel still better...Kitsch gilds the crisis, and we are beguiled.25 Kitsch is here understood as a means that helps accept a life in need of \"gilding.\" By causing second tears on a marriage, kitsch is expected to create a universal brotherhood that by its indulging in second tears accepts what deliberating people would not accept. The author of the comment certainly does not think that kitsch reduces reality contact, but his words imply such reduction nonetheless. Kitsch has become a recognized tool to reduce us to a community of raw feelings, willing to follow feelings because they seem the feelings of mankind. In practice, it is recognized to be not just a reality sweetener but a tool to bend people's will in one direction that makes consent by argument superfluous. As such a tool, kitsch is used in politics and advertisement, religion and rhetoric. Making the masses believe in their autonomy by staging mass mobilizing events that underchallenge rational capabilities, yet suggest having the applause of all naturally feeling mankind, is common to totalitarian systems, election campaigns in Western democracies, and mass 24 Sennett, Fall of Public Man, assigns similar importance to 1848, though he focuses on \"personality\" rather than on kitsch: \"The revolution of 1848 was the first appearance of the dominance of a culture of personality\" (262). 25 Die Zeit, Nov 17, 2010. (My transl.) Yet in August 2011, commentators explained the reduction of Britain's economic growth down to 0.2 percent by the extra holidays introduced for the marriage celebrations. What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 197 events such as the Olympics or Church World Congresses. Even those who do not want to deceive use kitsch as a means to bend people's will as if it was legitimate.26 As kitsch is an opiate, its spread indicates the spread of despair over the impotence in mastering the modern life. In his Civilization and Its Discontents, Freud analyzed the despair kitsch indicates, even though he does not mention kitsch. Rather soothingly, he calls the despair \"uneasiness in civilization\" and explains it as a result of a \"disappointment,\" not by \"an extraordinary advance in the natural sciences and in their technical application,\" but by the discipline that any civilization imposes on human desires to make peaceful coexistence possible.27 Thus Freud provides an argument to defend kitsch as a necessary means to buffer the burdens of the tools' tyranny. Yet he recognizes the destructive potential of the uneasiness in civilization by adding to the instinct \"of hunger and love,\" as he here calls libido, \"an instinct of death or destruction.\"28 He is probably wrong to assume such an instinct, but right to state a strong readiness to destroy in contemporary society feeding on the suffering from the tools' tyranny. By stating such a readiness, Freud implies that kitsch, like other opiates, may stifle but cannot eradicate the aggression that responds to the tools' tyranny. The illusion of autonomy with which kitsch provides its adherent will turn into a \"fury of destruction,\"29 when the illusion breaks down but reality contact is not resumed. This happened in Germany after World War I. The defeat smashed Germans' power fancy without improving their reality contact. The result was a rise of the readiness to destroy that found its expression in Nazism. As we may expect, also this readiness was wrapped in kitsch. Saul Friedlander described the vicinity of kitsch and killing that appears in the kitschy glorification of death by the Nazis and by artists who felt attracted to death.30 He illustrates the method of how to pass crime off as virtue by Himmler's speech to the SS generals who had to execute the decision to delete the Jewry of Europe. Himmler commands the generals to make sure that nothing is stolen from the Jews, \"for the love of our people\" 26 Sennett, Public Man, describes the use of kitsch in politics by the concept of (inconspicuous) \"narcotic charisma\" (271). Yet he focuses on aspects of \"personality\" rather than of autonomy and its inhibition. 27 Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents (New York: Norton, 1962), 34f. 28 Ibid., pp. 64 and 66. 29 Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit § 589; Philosophy of Right § 5. Yet Hegel applies the term to abstract liberty. 30 Saul Friedländer, Reflections of Nazism: Essay on kitsch and Death (New York: Harper, 1984), p. 135. Italized in original. 198 Ulrich Steinvorth and to prevent \"any damage to our inner self, our soul and our character.\"31 He presents genocide as an act of decency. What Friedlander describes characterizes not only Nazi Germany but all contemporary societies, even if to a lower degree. Wars are a welcome way to make use of the economically superfluous, but they also meet a readiness that indicates an unbroken destructive potential. Today, Islamist leaders of terror organizations wrap their calls to murder in the language of religion that contains the accumulated kitsch of centuries. Western governments are not inferior to them. The American military doctrine of Shock and awe32 that aims at gaining rapid dominance over an enemy nation by a sudden destruction of its infrastructure was presented as minimizing \"civilian casualties, loss of life, and collateral damage,\" even though the more detailed description said the effect would be that of \"dropping nuclear weapons on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.\"33 The use of kitsch for wrapping crime in virtue demonstrates the worst property of kitsch: it replaces rational deliberation, by which alone we can distinguish between true and false and right and wrong, with the criterion of conformity to mankind. Corruption, mafia blackmail, and government terror, all the horrors thrillers are detailing, are backed up in a civilization with reduced contact to what is and ought to be the case. Ascribing so many vices to kitsch is not very credible if we think of our buying a pink plastic replica of the Cathedral of Florence or of kids convulsed with laughter about Donald Duck. Such behavior would be entirely innocent indeed if it did not contribute to the stupid kitsch of advertisement and movies, the nasty kitsch of mass mobilizations, and the subtle kitsch of administrative orders and scientific presentations. Understanding kitsch as reality sweetener or bad taste prevents us from recognizing the crimes kitsch makes possible. Still, we must not forget that by its appeal to what individuals strongly feel, kitsch opens up the chance that people will discover what else belongs to them: their power of deliberation, or reason, and their power of negation, or free will. Under the right conditions, kitsch can promote autonomy. 31 Friedlander loc.cit. 103. Himmler held his talk on October 4, 1943 in Posen. 32 The doctrine was developed by Harlan K. Ullman and James P. Wade, Rapid Dominance: A Force for All Seasons. Royal United Services Institute in Defense Studies, 1998. This publication was preceded by a report to the United States' National Defense University in 1996. The next quotation is from the Introduction. Klein, The ShockDoctrine, p. 396, pp. 399-406, describes Rumsfeld's part in the doctrine and its terrorist consequences. 33 Ibid. Chapter 1. The use of shocking crises to produce \"real change,\" recommended by Milton Friedman and described by Naomi Klein, The Shock Doctrine 2007, no longer needs wrapping in kitsch. What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 199 APPLICATION TO THE AESTHETICS OF MUSIC AND ARCHITECTURE It comes as a surprise that we may apply the understanding of kitsch by definition K to aesthetical problems of music and architecture. Such an application confirms K. There has been a dispute about whether there can be kitsch in music, or at least in so-called serious music. The dispute may seem bizarre, as it seems obvious that Wagner and other composers are sometimes kitschy.34 Yet if we presuppose kitsch consists in sweetening reality or in bad taste, rather than in preventing differentiating responses to stimuli, we have a reason to claim music can never be kitschy, for music cannot do without producing emotions, and, in the end, enjoyable ones. To understand music we have to indulge in it to some extent. So if we cannot avoid indulging in enjoyable emotions when listening to music, understanding music is a case of indulging in sweetening reality; hence it is always kitsch. Yet obviously not all music is kitsch. So it seems best to deny music the possibility to be kitsch in the first place. Obviously, too, we can apply this argument to literature and any other kind of art. Works of art, as Antigone shows, often require an immersion in the feelings they produce. If we follow the logic of the argument, either all art is kitsch or there can be no kitsch in art. Yet we can avoid this implausible conclusion if we understand kitsch as preventing differentiating responses. Then we can understand music and any other work of art are kitsch if and only if they lead to indulgence in powerful emotions that exclude differential attention. Wagner's music does produce such emotions; in particular emotions of an unconditional surrender to a power the listener identifies with, if only to the power of music. The surrender is of the kind enjoyed in mass mobilizations and masquerades as autonomy. No wonder Wagner's music is loved in such mobilizations. Kitsch is a problem also in architecture. The Vienna architect Adolf Loos, famous for the the essay \"Crime and Ornament,\"35 argued that ornament is crime. He regarded ornament as sweetening, hence as kitsch, hence as condemnable, and propagated functional architecture. Architects followed in flocks, wreaking havoc in most cities, making buildings bleak and boring. Yet unless functional architecture is witty, it is oppressive and a pretext for cheap production. Like music theorists, architects ignored the fact that kitsch consists not just in using ornaments and other reality sweeteners, but in their use to 34 Reported by Kulka 101; Susan Sontag, in Dorfles ed., Kitsch, loc. cit., p. 239, said that \"as far as serious music is concerned, very little is called kitsch.\" 35 In his Sämtliche Schriften, Wien (Herold) 1967; transl. in Ulrich Conrads, \"Programs and Manifestoes on 20th Century Architecture\" (Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1964.) 200 Ulrich Steinvorth produce illusionary feelings of autonomy, in particular to make the observer identify with the power represented. Such design was cultivated by the Nazi architect Albert Speer and by most Middle Eastern and Western empires, from ancient Egypt and Rome to the Soviet and the American Empires with their wedding-cake palaces and staggering business towers. Like Wagnerian music, it invites the subjects to rave about a power mistaken for autonomy. It demonstrates power that frightens the foe and fortifies the friend. Yet building and composition cannot only use ornament and sweetness, but can demonstrate power, namely the power of intelligence in architecture and composition, without any kitschiness at all. Examples are an overwhelming mass of musical compositions36 and Gothic cathedrals, Roman aqueducts, and modern bridges and dams, demonstrating the most developed construction technology of their time. Such works allow admiring technological or compositional power but do not invite to identifying with or dissolving in it. Our historical approach to kitsch also provides an explanation as to why what has been art yesterday often is kitsch if imitated today. To build a house today in the Gothic style does not pass for art, however great art the same house has been in Gothic times. Similarly, to compose music in the style of a past epoch is not taken for real art. Remarkably, authors agree in this aesthetic view.37 A house or a composition was art in their times only if it composed the elements then available so as to allow differentiating judgments and feelings in looking at and living in it or in playing or listening to it. But imitation is felt to promote indulging in something of which general admiration is presupposed, hence to exclude creating an object that allows differentiating responses. Moreover, if the artist renounces the use of means available in his or her time, he or she performs the very underachievement pretending to be an achievement that marks kitsch. In contrast, if a city recreates its historical buildings destroyed in war, the restored buildings will not be felt to be kitsch because there is no pretension of an artistic achievement. For their condemnation of any ornament and not only those that aim at illusion, Loos and his adherents might appeal to Kant's aesthetic. Kant said: 36 When Bach added to his compositions the words Ad maiorem Dei gloriam, (to the greater glory of God), he expressed that he did what he did not for his sake but for the sake of a work to which he felt subordinated. 37 To escape this problem, Kulka 54ff distinguishes between the aesthetic and the artistic value of art, the latter taking account of the \"art-historical value\" of a work of art. This distinction can explain (as Kulka shows) the different judgments on a work such as Picasso's Les Demoiselles d'Avignon but not the phenomenon mentioned. What Kitsch Tells Us about Our Time 201 At any time, taste is still barbarian if it uses allures and emotions to please or even makes them the measure of applause. 38 Kant thus seems to deny any music and ornament aesthetic value, as there is no music or ornament that does not somehow use allures and emotions to please. Yet art may not only play with allures and emotions; often it ranks higher because of the deeper the emotion it produces. Not only music and architecture but all art is misunderstood if we understand kitsch as sweetening rather than as preventing differentiating responses; for a work of art turns into kitsch, not if it moves or pleases, but if it does so by preventing differentiation. Kant is right to warn us against the second tears kitsch literature tries to produce in the reader, but wrong if he condemns the first tear. Yet we can also read Kant in a more favorable light. He did not prohibit all \"allures and emotions,\" but those that only serve to please, and thus stop art from following its intrinsic aim. Kant insisted on judging the value of a work of art by its inherent standard rather than by an external goal. Anyway, however we interpret Kant, if we understand kitsch by K, we have to agree that art may present its object in a pleasant form, but must not do so if pleasing is its only goal. University of Hamburg Hamburg, Germany ulrich.steinvorth@uni-hamburg.de 38 Kant, Kritik der Urteilskraft §13: \"Der Geschmack ist jederzeit noch barbarisch, wo er die Beimischung der Reize und Rührungen zum Wohlgefallen bedarf, ja wohl gar diese zum Massstabe seines Beifalls macht\" (my tr.).\n\nCHAPTER XV GLOBALIZATION: MODERN MYTH OR IDEOLOGICAL PROJECT? IULIA ANGHEL Abstract: The present wears the visible tracks of a new and effervescent idea – the unification and symbiosis of identities. This type of vision over cultural values and geopolitical limitations tends to dissolve the previous picture of a world dominated by heterogenic and irreducible differences and raises some hard questions. Are we confronting a disguised ideological project or is it a new and modern form of myth? The main aim of this article is to explore the lines of struggle and tension regarding what we call today the phenomenon of globalization. The central hypothesis refers to a pre-existent background for this type of symbolic unification which made possible the concentration of human relations and interactions, considered to be a mark of a late modernity. One of the core issues contained in this article will refer to an attempt of identification of the primary sources of the great change of paradigm generated by the secularization of the social sphere. On another level, this could also imply a short inquiry on the rise and extension of the very influential dimension of political mythology. Another subject that I intend to present is linked to an analysis of the communist ideology defined as an intermediate stage for a specific type of globalization. At the same time, I will try to offer an interpretation of the communist mythology as a form of exploitation of the perennial collective aspirations and dreams. The final part of this article will be focused on a discussion of the mythological dimension of globalization and will host an attempt to identify and de-construct its stereotypes and hidden structure. The study will evolve mainly through the reference frames designed by the writings of Alain Besançon, Katherine Verdery, and Lucien Sfez, but also will consider other possible visions. It is important to mention that even though this kind of global and very theoretical approach will necessarily involve some simplifications and generalizations, and could not exhaust the whole sum of significations and senses of the discussed terms, it could still be useful in designing a new space of debate. Keywords:Globalization, human values, cleavage, identity, political myth, unity 204 Iulia Anghel INTRODUCTION One of the major provocations of democratic theory is to offer answers about its main scope. Hard to accept or not, democracy tends to action and to influence political entities and historical epochs, without a clarifying justification1 . Often it is said that the democratic option is the best option for the majority of people. The question remains: What majority? Is it an eternal rule for every type of society and evolutionary moment? Is it suitable for every cultural pattern? The only answer is the silence. Interactions between the specific democratic model and the tendency of a particular structure of values are united today by the complex term of globalization. Its vocation is doubled by an implicit rule that proclaims it as the only possible option, which generates an illusory picture. We are tempted to believe that the whole planet is included in this new, humanistic and progressive movement. The real sense of globalization is perhaps lost in this variety of implications. One of the central scopes of this article is to try an exploratory view over the real limits and shapes of globalization, as we face it today. Also, I will try to show some hidden aspects of this extremely provocative reality. First I have to mention that the term \"globalization\" is used in a specific way and is understood as a form of colonization of a particular model, the Western culture, with limits and edges often determined by very subtle political interests. Of course, globalization is much more than that, but we may accept that one of its important elements is this domination of a set of \"core values\" that tend to minimize other cultural alternatives. One important argument will be linked to the concept of the \"extended border,\" understood as a limitative line that arises between the space of the universal project and the rest of the world. The central argument is that even if we tend to believe that globalization is a natural, progressive, and legitimate evolution of a universal and humanistic project, in fact we may suspect the intervention of an ideological frame. This way globalization becomes an expression of a silent dominance of a cultural pattern against diversity and not an \"open model\" that slowly evolves and includes new types of values. The term of \"myth\" placed also in the title is used in a metaphorical way and its target is to stress our vulnerability in front of the perennial ideal of a universal and borderless society.2 Even if this type of very general and abstract exploration is exposed to some limitations and simplifications, it could still prove its utility in highlighting the hidden aspects of the globalization movement. 1 Ed. Ian Shapiro, Casiano Hacker-Cordon, Democracy's Edges (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). 2 J. J. Wunenburger, Politics Imageries (Bucharest: Paideia Publishing House, 2005). Globalization: Modern Myth or Ideological Project? 205 GLOBALIZATION BETWEEN PAST AND FUTURE TIMES The concept of globalization is controversial, multivalent, and hard to define in the light of its uncountable set of consequences. Involving a complicated range of symbolic, ideological, and economical perspectives, globalization tends to function as a unification vector for divergent phenomena such as: the free market extension, the invasion of the Western cultural model or the informational revolution. All these fragmentary elements are paradoxically chained by the idea of \"boundary annihilation.\" One of the main features of this new vision is the problem of indetermination of limits. Compression of the space functions at the same time as an extension of identities. The domination (real or not) of a Western-originated model raises some deceitful questions in the field of classical problems of ethical and political philosophy. An important part of the theoretical exploration of the problem of globalization is based on the idea that all these dissolving tendencies are in fact an exclusive mark of the contemporary world. Nevertheless, a short look at the history of ideas may bring to light some hidden roots of the globalization project. If we define this paradigm in terms of a unification project of cultural identities and at the same time as a dissolving vector for classical boundaries and limitations, we may discover that globalization is not such a new reality. One of the first cases with relevant similarities may be considered the Medieval structure of identities. Here, religious influence generated some interesting key points. The world was not yet a melting pot, but we recognize the presence of an extended border. The Enlightenment movement continued this unification of values and functioned as a primary stage of global identity. This first dissolving frame suffered in the end a fragmentation generated by the intervention of the Age of Nations, but its fundamental ideas survived in a cryptic form. These hidden tendencies were revealed again by the intervention of the ideological projects of the nineteenth century. Class identity and the new born proletarian values shattered the national limits and gave birth to a new type of global and universal project. Marx's theory over the annihilation of space sustains the thought that the capitalist system generates an accumulation of resources and slowly destroys the old form of economic relations.3 This natural movement of historical evolution will bring, in the end, the pauperization of the proletarians, but also will raise their class consciousness, making revolution possible. It is interesting to mention that in Marx's approach, the unification of values and cosmopolitan world ideas are not surprising at all and they make sense for the future of the communist project. There is a complicated road trip between idea and reality, so this kind of ideological unification 3 K. Marx, \"Maniesto of the Communist Party\" in Selected Works, third edition, vol. 1 (Bucharest: Political Publishing House, 1966). 206 Iulia Anghel didn't last, and the universal and non-limited vision of the fathers of the communist project was replaced by a kaleidoscopic range of small systems. For Medieval unification there were two major types of main points, the religious identity and the intellectual bridge of the Latin language. The small informational revolution implied by Gutenberg's invention will be reproduced on a different scale by the informational era, opened through the interventions of the new technologies. The ideological stage invented its extended borders through the complicated tool of the political culture. Proletarians from all types of societies were this way linked in a determinational chain. Karl Marx's prophecies were not respected and this world-spread revolution didn't generate a social heaven, but as a paradox it made possible today's globalization. From a general point of view, we could identify four major paradigms that fit globalization tendencies: The Medieval community of religion that had its elitist language, the Lights of modernity that used the cultural language centered on humane values, Marx's ideological project, which was linked with the class consciousness, and in the end, the present concentrations of the identities which are patronized by the informational revolution. All these stages share some interesting similarities that make us accept as possible a cyclic-shaped model. The unification trends are supporting a dissolving element: the elitist Medieval community was brooked by the Illuminist vector, the Enlightenment lost its general aimed values by the interventions of the ideological culture, and the last one was proclaimed defeated through the installation of the informational era. An important question remains about the essence of globalization: Is this a genuine contemporary reality, made possible by the interventions of a natural process that had its roots at the beginning of modernity, or are we discussing a recurrent pattern of compressing and extending identities, through a dynamic type of borders? It is difficult to raise an ultimate response, but it is quite obvious that today's globalization shares some provocative features with past similar projects. The expansion of a specific cultural pattern and its self-proclaimed universality also raises some specific questions about the domains of ethics, values, and politics. THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTENDED BORDER: INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE \"UNIVERSAL\" PATTERN All the previous attempts to create a universal, general, and uniform space of identity were paradoxically linked by the concept of borders. Extended or not, the border was a limitation line, between this pattern and the rest of the world. The \"war line\" was not placed in an evolutionary way, splitting the past from the future, the evolved visions from the retrograde ones. What makes this separation so interesting is its eliminatory vocation. The Medieval community was labeled as an elitist construct, its values and its language being quite non-accessible to regular people. Despite these Globalization: Modern Myth or Ideological Project? 207 extremely restrictive conditions, we may consider it in a light of a universal project. Supporting this thesis we could invoke three major aspects: the dissolving effect of the religious factor, the presence of new, specific, and unitary path of communication (Latin), and the alchemy of a new system of values. This way the evolution of the \"Gutenberg's code\" began.4 The world placed outside their model was often ignored and treated as a \"neglected part\"5 of reality. Of course, it may be said that the universal communion of the Medieval project was not perfect, and this aspect will be resolved in the next stages. The Enlightenment movement induced the sensation of a change, but the border is still there, as a defining line and not as a temporary element. The aims of the Light's Revolution are more general and more universal, but they are still trapped in a hermetic paradigm. This profound change that took place in the referential system didn't affect all the people. The \"good savage\" was perceived as an ideal model of harmony between human and nature, but he didn't know it, and because of that, the Enlightenment received some counterexamples quite late. These structures were repeated for most of the revolutions and manifestations of the \"extended border\" phenomena. The new and extremely militant ideological cultural paradigm is one of the clearest examples. Marx's revolutionary vision drastically excluded whole categories of social groups from the global and glorifying future. As an observation, we may conclude that all these revolutions and changes of paradigm that in a first stage had the appearance of universal and global projects are, in fact, dependent in a fundamental way on the concept of limit. There are other worlds outside the pattern that did not participate in its values, types of interactions, and internal rules. This exterior was in the past slowly included in the extended border. The main questions remains: is today's project one that devoured the external space? Is there nothing outside the influence and the systemic values of what we call today the \"global village\"? The previous theoretical and quite simplifying analysis proved its utility by revealing some interesting aspects. First, universal projects like the Enlightenment or the proletarian revolution had their own limits that eliminated the rest from the equation. The Lights epoch did it in an implicit manner and Marx's revolution in an explicit and violent way. Secondly, the border line is not a temporary limitation of these types of projects, but a specific and constitutive feature. And in the end, global projects imply some eliminatory operations against other types of systems and values that did not fit the pattern. 4 M. McLuhan, The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2002). 5 G. Bataille, The Accursed Share (Iaşi: European Institute Publishing House, 1994). 208 Iulia Anghel GLOBALIZATION OF VALUES: LIBERATION MOVEMENT OR \"TOTALITARIAN MODEL\"? We already saw that an important variety of universal-aimed projects like the Marxist revolution or the Enlightenment were dependent on the concepts of limit and \"rejected groups.\" The problem of the extended border was not solved by the modern frame of globalization, and we can still perceive an \"external reality\" that refuses to fit into this model. The present expression of the \"extended border\" generates an acceleration process for some old conflicts and separation lines. The hermetic communities that functioned through the intervention of a self-regulatory mechanism must face unexpected influences in this new reality. The fate of distant countries and extremely different political structures is, in the present paradigm, linked by globalization's chain. At first look, this extensional model could be considered as a liberation tool. There is a core of \"good\" values that are replacing some \"dark paradigms\" such as totalitarianism or archaic structures. But the real problem rests in the label that we apply to these specific values. There is a sphere of interest where our attention is concentrated and there is another spatial dimension, very similar to the first, that rests in dark. The globalization model and its specific features didn't extend quite naturally; its geography is a very well established one. What I am trying to highlight here is the non-legitimate tendency of selection of the interest spheres that must melt in the project. Also, it is important to mention that the cultural model of globalization has a very selective pattern of manifestation. There are places where the ideal of promoting democracy is not valid, and globalization acts only as a rejection force. We fight for democracy and a free market in some places, and in other extremely similar contexts we choose to remain passive. Also, the silent dominance of the \"European-American pattern\" is labeled as the only possible model. But the question remains: is it about liberation, or we are witnesses to another pulsation of the limit? The philosophical approaches to these new challenges launched by globalization are divided in two major types of visions: an isolationist model that militates for preserving some kind of hermetic evolution, and the \"open approach,\" where the central aim is to promote and extend the model and the values of this type of globalization. At first, it may seem that the two possible lines of evolution are extremely different and leave space for a real decision. But an important aspect remains hidden behind them. The whole debate is referring to one single and exclusive model: the Western system of values and significations, which is about being inside the border or not being at all. The cultural dominance of this \"Western made\" universal project is often unnoticed inside the \"extended border.\" The real and quite violent consequences tend to become visible outside this symbolic line. The culture of globalization is defined in a stereotypical way as an obviously exclusive Globalization: Modern Myth or Ideological Project? 209 way of evolution. If one specific society places itself in a different paradigm, the border refuses to extend anymore. SOME PARTISAN CONCLUSIONS An important part of the modern democracies is based on the principles of freedom and equality that are directly linked to the doctrine of human rights. The evolution and extension of this vision in the post-war world was extremely complex. Its unique role was to prevent abuse and oppression. Still, this humanistic and universal project, directly linked to a sort of \"late Enlightenment,\" had its own limits and dark areas. Outside the border, there is a world defined by ethno-cultural diversity and with significant differences in the field of values.6 There are two kinds of visions over this failure to eliminate the limit line. Some voices maintain that the whole doctrine of human values is based on culture. It may be useful for one type of culture and dangerous for another. So, there are parts of the world that refuse to fit into this pattern. Another sort of explanation is based on the idea of a split between a majority culture, in this case \"the Western model,\" and the minority's values, other possible visions, placed outside the border. The cosmopolitan project appeared in history very often as forms of reactions generated against the privileges of a majority group. In this way, a sort of particular type of values was extended and replaced an old paradigm, which represented the most seductive image of the universalistic ideal.7 The battle between the small identity and the extended one is not new and not even specific for our contemporary crisis. Enlightenment cosmopolitism accepted the possibility of creating a universal culture, but at the same time they were conscious of the danger of domination from one specific model. For these early prophets of globalization, the new dimension of identity could not be limited by a dominant culture that excluded the rest from its own universe. This intuition is more interesting in the light of its premonitory aspect; the Enlightenment was not confronted with the result of its own ideas, but in a strange manner its main voices put forth some guidelines regarding a possible corruption of the initial model. Today's project of globalization is a very complex one that implies a combination of various ideological and political elements. Its seductive force tends to put in shadow the fundamental implications and promote the image of a universalistic idea. Maybe the Western cultural pattern is a good one and its extension is a sign of evolution, but the lack of permeability of this model and its monopolizing tendencies are the proofs of a profound 6 W. Kymlicka, Politics in the Vernacular – Nationalism, Multiculturalism, and Citizenship (New York: Oxford University Press Inc., 2001). 7 A. Giddens, Modernity and Self-Identity (Standford University Press, 1991). 210 Iulia Anghel internal crisis. Maybe the border will continue to extend, but its eliminatory propensity remains constant. The solution is probably an \"open model,\" where values could be adapted, changed, hybridized. This way the border will be dissolved and transformed into a fluid line. But the question remains: is this possible? Could the internal structure of the globalization project support a plurality of systems of values? The answer is still uncertain and probably will be delivered in a quite distant future. Faculty of Philosophy University of Bucharest Bucharest, Romania lili.anghel@yahoo.com PART II NEW AXIOLOGICAL CHALLENGES IN TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENTIFIC THINKING\n\nCHAPTER XVI HUMAN BEING: FROM SPIRITUAL VALUES TO TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS CRISTIAN BERŢI Abstract: This paper will discuss the meaning of the human being today, his role in the world, and his expectations concerning knowledge. We will discuss the opinions of three great thinkers of the last century: Constantin Noica, Werner Jaeger, and José Ortega Y Gasset, who debated the problems of the human being throughout history and presented an image of the man of the future (which begins about now) which, as we will see, is very close to our image today. This image has suffered a great many changes throughout history. It remains to be seen if those changes were good or bad for mankind as a whole. Our destiny is influenced by our past decisions and by the level of understanding of our past mistakes. Human values have always been the focus in many fields of study, but philosophy has taken an even greater interest in it because of the implications in the construction of a better world with man at its center. One of man's ideals was (and still is) finding the truth, if not as a whole, at least in part. For this purpose he continuously searched within himself and his surroundings, even as his knowledge of the world evolved. Therefore, we shall try to examine the implications of technological developments in molding human values. Keywords: human being, ancient view, progress, ethics, values. In this new age of endless possibilities, man is faced with many changes and new challenges. Technological developments represent a new way of living, and people have to adapt to these requirements. In order to do so, they have to understand themselves and comprehend their common fundamental issues. Therefore, man has to go back to the past to see how his ancestors saw themselves and their own essential values. For his foresight to be as accurate as possible, he has to be able to better understand his past. Looking into the past will help him to have a clear image of the stage of development he has reached. This is the method used by the three philosophers we will discuss in this paper. They tried to understand the way of life of the ancient Greeks, who were the most important and most developed people of ancient times. This was because of the great philosophers and thinkers who lived then: Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, among others. The first philosopher we will consider is Constantin Noica. He is one of the greatest philosophers Romania has ever had. He wrote a substantial work about the human being and the becoming of Being. All his works are 214 Cristian Berţi centered on Man and the problems concerning him. He was very attached to the Greek philosophers, especially Plato, and their way of thinking. According to Noica, today's man is preoccupied with his freedom and with his lawful rights, and therefore concentrates on what he feels he deserves, rather than respecting his obligations. Unlike the ancient Greeks, who were preoccupied with the community, modern man is concerned with himself only. This, in the Romanian philosopher's opinion, indicates that we are living in a world of egotism, like the world of Narcissus: the man who only loved himself, for which he was punished by the gods. By \"automating his spiritual life,\" man \"came to the point of not having the sense of sin at all,\"1 says Noica. Throughout his work, the Romanian philosopher appears to be very concerned about the moral issues brought about by new technological developments. He considers knowledge to be one of the most important values of man, so he puts him right in the middle of that world: \"the world of knowledge is not the world as it is, but the world as we make it to be.\"2 He says that although the search for truth is beneficial, it cannot account for our knowledge. A simple correlation between the fact and its announcement (as believed by the Greeks) does not tell us much, because it cannot show us that what we know is actually the truth. So we need another level of discussion, which is called by Noica the \"objectivity level,\" which means that knowledge will be valid anytime and anyplace: \"in the act of knowledge not only the process of receiving – willingly or unwillingly – certainties is performed; there is at stake something much more than that: it is perhaps a destiny not set to appear in a world already finished, which man's mind could record, admire, and leave untouched, but rather one of participating in a relentless remaking of the world, or of enriching it, if one cannot remake it.\"3 Noica presents modern man as one who has to search, to uncover underlying truths, to find out new things in some way independent of his conscience. Truths exist in reality, and we just have to reveal them; this is the motto of the modern man. The sentiment that \"everything is possible\" is specific to the modern man, but then he also feels he loses face to technical advances, the product of his own work. Actually, he is scared he may not control its consequences, may not foresee its new developments. Noica says that in Plato's dialogues, moral law prevails for man, and that the Greek philosopher affirms the atonement for and accountability of sin. The Romanian philosopher considers that when the world speaks of \"the new man,\" it defines him as the negation of the old man. But for him this is just another illusion, because the new man actually is a sequel to the old one, with his principles and values. In the present, according to Noica, man is trapped between apathy and fear, and is agonizing about the future. 1 Constantin Noica, De caelo (Bucureşti: Ed. Humanitas, 1993), p. 110. 2 Ibid., p. 30. 3 Ibid., p. 42. Human Being: From Spiritual Values to Technological Progress 215 The individual experiences these two conditions because he is situated in a singular state. Today's man can escape from this situation only through morality and ethics, and this can only be achieved within the community, an idea in agreement with the Greeks. The best modern example, according to Noica, is Christianity. Another philosopher preoccupied with the subject of modern man is Werner Jaeger. In his work History and Classical Philology, he is concerned with the values of modern man and with the level of education needed to achieve a higher standard of knowledge. The German philosopher says that the ideal of culture is that of the humanism of the Renaissance: free culture, with no exact purpose, achieved for and through man. So he pleads for a return to Antiquity, to the values of that period, now destroyed by modern technological progress. He says that humanism, and all of its values, was the highest form of Greek culture, and was successfully resumed in the Renaissance. The most important value was the famed paideia of the Greeks, understood as the culture of humanism. Paideia means education, and it contains all the forms of culture existing in Ancient Greece. Jaeger proposes that molding the young – education in general – should be done by following the example of the humanist culture and its principles. The main principle of this culture focuses on the essences of things – on the bases, not on forms; on authentic ideas and their strengths. The Greeks formed the idea of man as a whole4 and not as a whole made of pieces, says Jaeger. That is to say, the pure image of man is that of the unity of the spiritual and the organic. The German philosopher offers a very beautiful definition for humanism: \"humanism is nothing but man's journey to become man, and the way was first shown to us by the Greeks.\"5 The whole idea of culture, in Jaeger's work, refers to education, to the Greek paideia; he agrees with the Greeks in seeing the total education of the body and the mind as essential and as the only thing that can bring the human being closer to himself, to his essence. Jaeger's work is set with the same guidelines as other works from his time and earlier, like Nietzsche's The Birth of Tragedy, having the purpose of reviving German culture and spirituality through the appeal to Greek tradition, to that wonderful ancient culture which served as a model. This culture was the first one to have created itself through man and his essential values. Jaeger proposes that before we progress in the technological fields, we should return to the ancient Greek tradition and learn its language, so we can understand its greatness. The third philosopher preoccupied with the state of modern man is José Ortega y Gasset. This Spanish philosopher writes about the impact that changes undergone by modern man have had on his way of living in 4 Werner Jaeger, Istorie şi filologie clasică, trad. Alina Noveanu, (ClujNapoca: Ed. Grinta, 2008), p. 97. 5 Ibid., p. 99. 216 Cristian Berţi community and on his new ideals in comparison with those of the Greeks. He says that the most accomplished image of man is that of his projection into the future. In his opinion, the worst thing that could happen to man is to lose his future, to lose the hope of \"what is about to come.\"6 Man lives both with the past and the present through the perspective of the future. Ortega y Gasset believes that in our day, the idea of nation has disappeared and has been replaced by the idea of Europe. The nation becomes a mere province, because it can no longer offer the idea of future. The Spanish philosopher tries to understand the concept of nation by comparing it to the Greek polis. The polis is built up as a simple society, as a union that doesn't look into the future, but lives in the present, while the nation is composed of a \"dense population, a numerous one, which is why its social form is characterized by being essentially profound,\"7 and, moreover, it is focused on the dimension of the future. The Greek man lived a shallow life, according to Ortega y Gasset, because there was in his conscience the necessity of political involvement and a preoccupation with the existence of his city, while the modern man, reassured by the enduring existence of his nation, has none of those concerns, because he is sure of its continuous existence in the future. Ortega y Gasset sees the Greek man as an inertial being as opposed to the modern man, who is an active being, a man of action. The former is a traditional man while the latter is an enterprising man. Like Noica and other great thinkers of the twentieth century, Ortega y Gasset feels compelled to discuss man's technological advancements in the past few centuries. He follows the guidelines of those who believe that this represents a danger for society, because it is a menace to morality: \"Nations found themselves suddenly closer dynamically. And that is exactly the time when European nations have departed most from morality. Therefore, is not the danger of such circumstances clear?\"8 Ortega y Gasset presents here a very well-organized chain of causality with the purpose of showing the paradox of technological developments. Man is closer and closer to his fellow man, thanks to new advancements, but it is exactly that progress that leads to a social rift between people, between communities. Ortega y Gasset believes that we cannot talk about modern man, because we don't know yet the nature of man in general, let alone that of the contemporary man. The Spanish philosopher talks about the Greeks' idea of human nature, especially the ideas of Aristotle and the Stoics, which were narrowed down in time to the \"postulate of the invariability of the laws of Nature.\"9 Possession of such a fixed nature gives man the liberty of action, yet that liberty is limited by his boundaries. 6 José Ortega Y Gasset, Europa şi idea de natiune, trad. S. Mărculescu (Bucureşti: Ed. Humanitas, 2002), p. 13. 7 Ibid., p. 61. 8 Ibid., p. 118. 9 Ibid., p. 133. Human Being: From Spiritual Values to Technological Progress 217 Ortega y Gasset also talks about a theory of life, and about the fact that human life is a continuous equation of the past and the future. Thus, the present is an integrative synthesis of the other two times of our existence. But though they belong to us and to our history, we never live them as either memories or projections; they escape us because we are situated in their synthesis, which is the limit. Continuing his discussions about the Greeks, Ortega y Gasset attacks Aristotle and says that he is in error when he claims that man is endowed with the occupation of knowledge, \"first of all because most people perform a sufficient amount of intellectual activities and still aren't engaged in knowledge. Secondly, because it could not be further from the truth that man could possess those activities capable to achieve what, by its lofty name, knowledge represents – our great promise.\"10 Concerning contemporary man, Ortega y Gasset believes that he is in a poor situation, dominated by instability and uncertainty, because the factor that should ensure his stability, in this case, the past, is useless and unworthy of respect: \"The past is like the tail of a comet; it is the factor that provides stability. Hence, the radical instability of our times. Well, ladies and gentlemen, this is, simply, the current human situation.\"11 Ortega y Gasset proclaims that the death of contemporary Western civilization occurred by itself, through the suppression of the principles that constitute its cornerstone, namely, science. The best example for the Spanish philosopher is the fact that it has been proven by Gödel that logic doesn't exist as a science. But it doesn't have to disappear; it can be reborn by itself, and Ortega y Gasset 's solution is the invention of new forms. He says there isn't a will in man, but certain rules established by society determine his gestures, independent of his nature. The laws exert a pressure upon man that suffocates him, and so his relationship with society is not natural but artificial. Thus, the State with its hyperorganization is man's biggest enemy, because it does not take him into account individually, but is concerned only with society as a whole. In order to maintain his identity and his essence, man today has to fight with all of his strength against the stifling force of the State. Ortega y Gasset considered that with new technology, war is now only a threat that could hardly materialize, because weapons have a total destruction force. That is why the configuration of the world is about to change. We believe the Spanish philosopher to be wrong, as, indeed, there have been other wars since he wrote those thoughts. He believed that if in all previous wars the newest weapons were always used, that would have to be the case for future wars too, and one can be sure that humans wouldn't be so stupid as to use lethal weapons in a future battle. But a war can be fought with less lethal weapons, and new conflicts emerged even after the discovery of the nuclear bomb. These lethal weapons have their own role in 10 Ibid., p. 143. 11 Ibid., p. 153. 218 Cristian Berţi the world, because given their destructive force, they represent a bargaining tool in the effort of maintaining peace. While it doesn't strictly concern our study, we cannot ignore the position of the great philosopher Ernst Cassirer on the issue of man. He also tries to understand the meaning of the human being, and he says that we can do that if we follow the history of this concept. He believes that this concept has a history of its own that starts in the ancient period and continues to the modern era. By following its history, we can understand its evolution and its transformation, its problems, its struggles, its place, its role in the world, and everything else concerning the human being. Cassirer believes that as early as ancient times, humans' purpose was to seek the self: \"The human being is considered to be that being which is constantly on the search for self – a being that at every moment should be examining and contemplating the conditions of its existence.\"12 There is an entire history of man, starting from the Presocratics and on to our days, not formulated by anybody. What Cassirer is trying to do is present some general line of thinking and understanding as to how it developed. So he presents man's image in the history of thought, as provided by Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Marcus Aurelius, Augustine, Descartes, Pascal, Montaigne Bruno, Darwin, and others. The reason he proposes this way of comprehending man and his actions is to target the real understanding \"of the general character of human culture.\"13 Another new idea brought to the issue of man by the German philosopher is that of the existence of a third system of man (in addition to receptor and effector): the symbolic one. The German philosopher believes that \"instead of defining man as an animal rationale, we should call him animal symbolicum.\"14 This new system opens up, in his opinion, the way to the civilization of the human being, because for him, symbolic thinking is one of the essential characteristics of human life. The first step in establishing human nature is the separation of man from animal, and for Cassirer (as opposed to other philosophers) this is done at the level of language (not at the rational level) – that is, as the difference between the discursive language and the emotional language. The symbolic is essential for the problem of man, because, according to Cassirer, if there is a definition of man, it can only be a functional one and certainly not a substantial one, and what better way to render something functional than by symbols. Noica notes the distinction made by Cassirer regarding man's definition, but, unlike the German philosopher, Noica believes in the existence of a substantial definition, the functional one being just the first step to successfully finding a complete definition. Man's creation is composed of a sum of elements which constitute the so-called circle of humanity: language, myth, religion, art, science, and 12 Ernst Cassirer, Eseu despre om (Bucureşti: Ed. Humanitas, 1994), p. 17. 13 Ibid., p. 40. 14 Ibid., p.45. Human Being: From Spiritual Values to Technological Progress 219 history. Cassirer starts his analysis of the human being from the premise that man is always involved in a self-search, in the search for unity within himself, but, after getting through the phases of his creation, he discovers discontinuities, contradictions, multiple forms as opposed to one only, so he considers that human nature doesn't consist of the search for its unity, but rather of the discovery of new sides, of new ways of being, which, although conflicting at times, have a unity of their own. The problem of the human being is a very complex one. It has concerned a lot of thinkers and scientists. We can't offer a solution for it, but what we could observe is that almost all discussions were conducted around the two big aspects that determine man's life: morality and knowledge. Greeks believed, in general, that man has to live his life according to moral values. Christians took the idea even further, saying that only through a completely moral life man can save his soul. In our time now, the concern raised by new technological advancements gives morality an even bigger role in the world. On the other hand, knowledge has changed its meaning and its position in the world from age to age. Greeks, especially Plato, believed it is the way to save your soul and that it's the only thing that could ensure a moral life. In Medieval times, Christianity changed the perspective and man was not interested in obtaining knowledge, because he was told faith is enough. In modern times, knowledge again plays a central part in human life, but now it has an inclination toward the scientific field and it means having as much information as possible. Man is now at a crossroads in his existence because of all the changes in his life, but he is learning to adapt to them. It is the only way to survive in times like these. In his essence, he is still something great, and because of that, we are sure he will overcome all obstacles. «Babes-Bolyai» University Faculty of History and Philosophy Cluj, Romania cristi.filosofu@yahoo.com\n\nCHAPTER XVII HUMAN WORTH ON THE THRESHOLD OF ITS TECHNOLOGICAL TRANSFORMATION ANA BAZAC Abstract: In fact, this paper is about social philosophy: it questions the social consequences of the technological transformations of man and how they will be managed. The social significance results from and is emphasized by the ontological approach to man. AI (artificial intelligence) has such a predictable consequence upon the human being that it has to be conceived of from an ontological point of view. I do not want to talk about what happens to humans as they are living longer, with lives improved and enhanced by medicine and bioengineering and about how they strive for a more capable, physically able body. I want to focus on the influence technology has on the human mind and classical human values, and whether old-style humans, as we knew them, are still going to be amongst us – are any classical human values going to be left to guide us or are we on the way to becoming super-intelligent humans guided by motives and ideals we do not yet fully comprehend? Is \"technological singularity\" upon us? \"Technological singularity\" is a term which has been introduced by Vernon Vinge, and it refers to the point of no return, the threshold one passes over and breaks, leaving all other people behind. Is it possible that passing this threshold will change our assessment of global problems and turn us from pessimists into optimists? For the moment, it seems rather that the optimistic theory of engineered singularity seems rather to transfigure a deep social pessimism. The result of the examination of both the consequences of AI on the human being and the social use of the present revolutionary science and engineering is the conscience of the contradictory state of man: from one standpoint, this state demonstrates the power of human reason, even though this reason would transform the human being as such, while from another point of view it shows the weakness of human reason and the social translation of this weakness, which generates a waste of human capabilities and lives. Thus the problem here is not to answer the dilemma of using our better reason and pass over the threshold of technological singularity, nor is it caving in to our lesser reason and rejecting AI and the option of going past the point of no return, but to discuss the social stakes at this present moment of choosing. The present era is on the threshold of the future transformation of the human into a technological singularity, but at the same time, it challenges 222 Ana Bazac the future of mankind as such through the present social (political) use of scientific discoveries. Therefore, this paper questions how the worth of man at this moment of technological transition is manifesting, and we do have to accept that both the better/optimistic and lesser/pessimistic reasoning will have a say in our action about technological singularity. Keywords: AI, Theory of Technological Singularity, philosophy, man, human person, kairos, science, technological risks, society, politics. Warning The person is the concrete expectation and prospect of the human being. The person is a specific human, and only from this concreteness do we conceive of the notion of person and personhood. When we are worrying about the worth of man, that is, the manner in which any certain person is treated by his/her fellow creatures, we think first of all of how his/her dignity could be menaced by some inimical circumstances, leaving his/her esteem and merit less valued by others. Just as humankind is revealed through the real facts, thoughts, and lives of the specific persons forming this species, the real dignity of a person – namely his/her merit, appreciation, and the due he/she deserves – is the result of the consideration of other persons. Philosophers have consistently emphasized that humans are creatures who freely shape their nature and evolution and that these \"spiritual intelligence(s) think and decide \"all possibilities.\"1 Thus, they have too optimistically suggested that human characteristics and human reason would be \"the most evenly distributed thing in the world.\"2 In fact, although the will and choice exercised in order to attain self-esteem and selfrealization belong to the individual, they reflect the social and historical circumstances where the consideration of others is crucial. If this consideration were missing, and if the lack of human possibilities for the future erased opportunities, people would be far from the circumstances necessary to demonstrate their human dignity. If they are not dignified, if others no longer consider them as worthy of representing human dignity, they become indignant: in Latin, in + dignatio means just the opposite of dignity, and the awareness of the situation where others no longer treat a person with respect for his/her humanity, but treat him/her indigne – unjustly, with cruelty, shamefully. Nowadays, we are facing waves of worldwide indignation against the disregard of the right to be considered, each of us, as a unique human person, because indignation is the natural human answer to undignified 1 Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Oration on the Dignity of Man (De hominis dignitate, 1486), http://www.cscs.umich.edu/~crshalizi/Mirandola/ 2 Descartes, Discourse on Method (1637), Part 1, http://public.wsu.edu/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_2/descartes. html On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 223 behavior. Indignation belongs to the human person, not to the abstract man. And because the worth of the human person is jolted, the worth of man as such is jolted. About Ontology, Humans, and Technology The need to understand the trans-temporal essence of man – even though this essence and this understanding have a concrete and historical content – has for a long time generated the preoccupation of philosophy with the being and, within this preoccupation, with the ontology of the human. However, there is no such a philosophical domain as the \"ontology of the human.\" The main object of philosophy is just the human. The human is both the mediating term and the object upon which the philosophical reflection practices. If ontology is the decrypting of what belongs to human existence (including human understanding and representations),3 the \"ontology of the human\" is rather a metaphor for the main analysis and object of philosophy. From this standpoint and in this broad sense, the ontology of the human means putting man first, that is, philosophical humanism. In a stricter sense, the ontology of the human configures what phenomenology, ethics, social philosophy, political philosophy, and the philosophy of knowledge elaborate. The metaphor of the ontology of the human presupposes an integrated representation of human complexity, composed of many fragments. According to this view, the ontology of the human highlights the features and specifics of man in his relationships with the world of objects as well as the world of subjects. An issue of these relationships is \"the conscience of the present, when historical thinking and utopian thinking fuse.\"4 An example of this fusion would be the theory of engineered singularity. But there is also the ontology of the objects people create and use. Related to our problem, the ontology of technology researches the possibilities illustrated by technology through the externalization of \"human capabilities through technique and technical devices,\" and, at the same time, the internalization of \"the way these machines work inside the human being (in both its mind and behavior).\"5 But all these types of possibility belong 3 Jacques Derrida, \"Le supplément de copule. La philosophie devant la linguistique\" (1971), in Jacques Derrida, Marges de la philosophie, (Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1972), p. 218: \"Aristotle tended to re-conduct the analysis to the place of turning up, or to the common root of blended language and thinking. This place is of the 'being'... But also how the being is said, how is said what is it, by the fact that it is, as it is\". 4 Jürgen Habermas, \"La crise de l'État-providence\" (1984), in Jürgen Habermas, Écrits politiques (Paris : Éditions du Cerf, 1990), p. 124. 5 Ionuţ Isac, \"The Ontology of Technology – Assumptions and Meanings,\" in (eds. Viorel Guliciuc and Emilia Guliciuc), Philosophy of 224 Ana Bazac just to the human (if essentia is possibilitas to exist, as Heidegger showed6), the two ontologies converging and overlapping. One last word here is that this ontological and epistemological process of convergence and overlapping means that we cannot conceive of the human as separated from the technology he creates, which transforms him, contributing to the construction of his humanness: \"We have always been, and therefore are, 'cyborgs' needing external prosthesis in order to act, think, create, and define ourselves.\"7 If that is true, what are the consequences of the present development of technology upon the worth of man? Theory of Engineered Singularity As it was coined, \"engineered singularity\" is a technological discovery8 that changes in a rapid and radical way the state of things and the state of the world. In fact, it signifies the discovery of artificial intelligence that would transform, through different ways, the definition of man himself, of his singularity in the framework of natural and engineered things. Man becomes a new human being, formed by both traditional natural parts and artificial parts managed by artificial intelligence, and then, Engineering and Artifact in the Digital Age (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010), p. 115. 6 Martin Heidegger, Being and Time (1927) (Malden, MA., Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), pp. 55-57; but also M. Heidegger, Letter on Humanism (1946), Translated by Miles Groth, http://wagner.edu/depertments/pscyhology/ sites/wagner.edu.departments.psychology/files/download/Martin%20Heid egger-%20Letter%20On%20'Humanism'.pdf . Possibilitas means here conscience of risks, risk-assuming, but also prevention of humanly undesirable events. 7 F. Kaplan, \"Intégration, incorporation, interface – l'évolution des systèmes techniques,\" Association F Gonseth, Cahiers de l'Institut de la Méthode, 31 (Janvier 2009), St-Imier, Switzerland, p. 13, in the translation of Ionuţ Isac, \"The Ontology of Technology – Assumptions and Meanings,\" p. 114. 8 The researchers who proposed the entire program of technological singularity insisted on the appearance of smarter-than-human intelligence (AI) as the main technological revolutionary event that would change the position of man in its even cosmic environment. See Vernor Vinge, The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post-Human Era, 1993, http://www.aleph.se/Trans/Global/Singularity/sing.html. But there are other technologies of smarter-than-human intelligence, such as: direct brain-computer interfaces, biological augmentation of the brain (or \"smarter minds creating still smarter minds,\" (Why Work Toward the Singularity, http://singinst.org/overview/whyworktowardthesingularity/), genetic engineering, ultra-high-resolution scans of the brain followed by computer emulation. All of these are emerging technologies. On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 225 finally, since intelligence is what generated the crowning of man as the dominant and superior being on Earth, man himself is dethroned by AI. There are three scenarios of engineered singularity: first, the more classical one – the rise of the intelligent robot surpassing the human brain and directing it onward; the second, which is the specific unification of AI and the human brain; and the third, the biomedical one, through nanotechnology and neuroscience. The first two scenarios are the basis of the new post-human entity. In the competition of these perspectives, even though the first seems to be the closest idealogically to the founding fathers of the theory as such, the second would be the most probable, at least as a step toward an absolute dethroning of the human brain by technology. Thus, let us accept that the second scenario is the core of the theory of engineered singularity: the new mind – natural plus AI – will generate a new kind of sapiens sapiens,9 who is still named only as post-human or trans-human. In fact, he will name himself. If we support the first scenario, the most radical, then the post-human or trans-human being appears more clearly. Anyway, the theory points out the consequences of the technological possible: the emergence of a new superhuman being by whom the entire environment will be transformed and new significances of this environment and its clash with the new rational being will be grasped. Engineered singularity challenges an epistemological break or rupture10 within \"normal science\"11 and philosophy, for it poses not only the transformation of the means of man (the instruments and objects) but also the change of the subject, the man himself. In ancient times, the human conscience used to consider the object – whether material from the world outside him, or the products of his mind – as subordinated to it. The object was that on which man acted, while the subject was him, the actor, or his mind and spirit, although his life and will were influenced by the inimical environment: he was the one who chose the kairos of his action over this environment. At least, this was the common representation, including the common representation of philosophy. But engineered singularity is a concrete unity of object and subject, an artificial human being with artificial intelligence acting over his natural basis – an object has become subject and a subject has become object – this special subject is the new singularity, for it is/will be mastering the decision and is/will be the criterion of all criteria. As bio-integrated AI, or as AI and human intelligence synthesis, or only as AI, the new subject is overthrowing once more Aristotle's ϋποκείμενον, since this time it could be considered to be subsistent to the attributes of existence. Thus it is transiting from \"the closed world\" of the old representation of the mind and the subject, to use Koyré's expression. 9 Sapiens sapiens – entity conscious of his intelligence. 10 G. Bachelard, La Formation de l'esprit scientifique (Paris: J. Vrin, 1938), pp. 27, 74. 11 Th. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1996), p. 23. 226 Ana Bazac The problem of engineered singularity has appeared in order to keep alive the conscience of the necessity to forecast the results of the technological developments on the entire society. The main aspects to be foreseen certainly belong to technology as such, but they are not the only ones. Although technological developments are moving within an uncertain and open space, the purpose of the research into technological singularity is to transform the unanticipated consequences into anticipated ones. In this respect, research into engineered singularity is situated under the sign of Prometheus. That is why it would be sad to take this research only as a cheap technophile tendency, not difficult to uncover.12 At the same time, the analysis of the imaginary background of a theory is important to understand its social motives and power within human activity. The Worth of Man As David Chalmers shows,13 the theory of engineered singularity as the evolution of super-intelligence poses some interesting analytical problems: whether this super-intelligence could constitute itself as an infinite artificial intelligence,14 and if this would ever be better from a human standpoint. But the theory is also important for a \"continental\" philosophical outlook: that which is preoccupied not only with the final result of the AI engineering facing the present common problems of mankind, but also with man as \"residual\" output within the process of AI engineering. The premise of this approach takes into account that logos – the human reasoning, the human capacity to create the logical world of the understanding and its objects, its ideas – is that which differentiates man from the animal that is his origin. Man is, therefore, his own creature,15 by developing his ability to think and to articulate what he thinks, and by enjoying this ability and the colors of this new ideal world he configures. By doing so, he grows up as a special being within the terrestrial world of beings: as a being nurtured from the world of culture he creates. 12 See N. Bøstrom, interviewed by Jean-Paul Baquiast, 15 octobre 2005, http://www.automatesintelligents.com/interviews/2005/sept/bostrom.html. 13 D.J. Chalmers, The Singularity: A Philosophical Analysis, 2010, http://consc.net/papers/singularity.pdf. 14 IT and sciences have been optimistic about the rapid rhythm of the evolution of intelligent machines creating more intelligent machines (this is the concept of \"speed explosion\"), but the practical process has so far shown that this rhythm is slower than was prefigured. 15 V. Gordon Childe, Social Evolution, N. Y., Henry Schuman, 1951, p. 169; but also T. Taylor, The Artificial Ape: How Technology Changed the Course of Human Evolution (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010). On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 227 Man is a cultural being and important are the means by which he maintains and amplifies the human cultural characteristic of his existence. The world of culture as such reflects the contradictory tendencies of man as natural, artificial, and social being. Consequently, there is continuity between AI research and what is essential in man as a \"genuine\" being, which appears following the transformation generated by the information technologies (IT). Indeed, the virtual world generated by the present IT does not change the culturespecific characteristics of man:16 \"It is in being virtual that we are human: since it is human nature to experience life through the prism of culture, the human being has always been a virtual being. Culture is our 'killer app': we are virtually human.\"17 At the same time, evolution means transformation, thus discontinuity: for we are not clever enough;18 with all the networks of scientists for responsibility,19 maybe the \"virtual worlds do have significant consequences for social life...in virtual worlds we are not quite human – our humanity is thrown off balance, considered anew, and reconfigured through transformed possibilities for place-making, subjectivity, and community...the layers of contingency within the category of virtually human, rather than exiling such contingency into a category of the posthuman and thereby retrenching the borders of the human itself.\"20 Finally, it is important to mention two aspects. The first is that another scenario is adding to the theory of engineered singularity: the \"collective intelligence\" resulting from the explosion of IT.21 The second is that there is a time overlap of the discoveries of AI and human bioengineering with the contradictions and shortcomings of the present civilization and relations of power. This is the reason for the problem of the adaptation of man to himself,22 through the emphasis of the ill-fated consequences of human 16 K. Lee, The Natural and the Artefactual: The Implications of Deep Science and Deep Technology for Environmental Philosophy (Lanham: Lexington Books, 1999), pp. 49-62, 123-148. 17 T. Boellstorff, Coming of Age in Second Life: An Anthropologist Explores the Virtually Human (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2008), p. 5. 18 J. Lovelock: 'We Can't Save the Planet', 2010, http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_8594000/8594561.stm . 19 See INES (International Network of Engineers and Scientists for Global Responsibility) for Peace and Sustainability), http://www.inesglobal.com/news2010.phtml. 20 T. Boellstorff, op. cit. 21 This insistence on the collective intelligence could be joined to Marx's collective worker. But see also Could the Internet Become One Giant Evil Entity? http://www.environmentalgraffiti.com/sciencetech/internet-becomeevil-entity/8678. 22 F. Rebufat, L'industrie humaine sera-t-elle la fin de l'homme ?, 7 décembre 2010, http://www.vivagora.org/spip.php?article789. 228 Ana Bazac industries and the means23 to re-direct their evolution. At the same time, it seems most probable that the technological engineering of man will exceed present man's ability to control his industries. Nevertheless, man is and will be the model of AI: because conscience is more than intelligence, the complex historical construction of man is and will be the pattern of the development of AI as conscience. The evidence that there is between man and machine a relationship closer than that supposed by some thinkers does not annul this source of AI: on the contrary, it supports both directions in the creation of engineered singularity.24 However, following Pico's observation, and even though being the model of the new AI creature, man as such will not survive: technological singularity will not be human.25 Therefore, theoretically, the worth of man seems to be at the same time denied and assured by engineered singularity: denied – because the new creature will exceed the human logical capabilities to solve the problems; assured – since the pattern, not only of logic, but also of goals, is human. Intermezzo with the Problem of Risks The agglomeration of the consequences of the modern and postmodern industrial revolutions – that is, of the modern and present technology and science – and the evidences of many bad, and even tragic, manifestations of the human civilization have been the basis, as we know, of a rich literature. It is important to mention here the theory of risks as one of the main theories concerning both the ontology of technology and the ontology of the human. According to this theory,26 modern society has developed the 23 One is the research of the principle of precaution and its functioning. Another one could be an engineering of large consultations, see Gilbert Gouverneur, L'« ingénierie de concertation » pour coller à la réalité sociale, novembre 2007, http://www.vivagora.org/spip.php?article174, and S. Parkinson, Science and Technology: Making a Difference, 16 October 2010, http://www.sgr.org.uk/sites/sgr.org.uk/files/Manchester-scitech-difference.pdf. 24 See H. Leggett, Robot Teaches Itself to Smile, July 9, 2009, http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2009/07/robotsmile/, also the Psi-Theory (Dietrich Dörner) and the cognitive architectures. 25 Pico della Mirandola, ibid.: \"a pure contemplator, unmindful of the body, wholly withdrawn into the inner chambers of the mind, here indeed is neither a creature of earth nor a heavenly creature, but some higher divinity, clothed in human flesh\". 26 See Ulrich Beck, Risk Society: Toward a New Modernity (1986), (London: Sage, 1992); Ulrich Beck, World Risk Society (1991) (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998); Ulrich Beck, World at Risk (2007) (Cambridge: Polity On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 229 paradoxical coexistence of the progress of civilization through science and technology, and the risks of this progress have multiplied. Moreover, at present, the risks are not only systemic (confronting the entire world and resulting from the world development of R & D), but seem to be no more imputable to anyone (there would not be a concrete responsibility), and cannot be compensated through insurances. At the same time, the theory mixes the natural and human causes and catastrophes, by focusing only on their occurrences and denying the technical and social possibility to prevent serious human error. This point of view illustrates rather a \"pragmatic sociological fatalism:\" \"What we could do is to study, to prepare us, but...\" Or, we have to remember that: 1) modern technological development has been integrated into a precise and specific social framework, so that the rhythm, paths, and objectives of technological development are not neutral and cannot be understood simply as resulting from the logic of knowledge, and 2) at least from the second half of the twentieth century on, scientists have taken into account that technological change could be anticipated, and that that anticipation allows the reduction of the possible negative consequences of discoveries, but that the final decisions do not belong to them. As long as the risks were not so high – or, rather, were pushed outside the countries hosting the scientific research – and obviously because of the ideology of political neutrality of scientists they embraced, most researchers did not focus on the social consequences of their deeds. (In a sense, one could say that the theory of engineered singularity is just reflecting the composed situation of aggravating global problems and ideological inertia of the intellectuals). But the last years – and now Fukushima – send us to another approach. Obviously, and leaving aside the concrete partial preventing of risks inside the technological projects, one cannot neglect the fact that nuclear plants were constructed near the ocean in a high seismic risk region. No one expected a 9-degree earthquake and a tsunami, but the engineers knew very well that, in case of accident, the highly radioactive water in the pressure vessel of a boiling water reactor would leak out of the damaged reactors and that the contaminated water leaking from reactors would flow into the sea. It is not here the place to discuss whether \"the social needs of the population – including the need for a safe and environmentally sustainable energy system – are subordinated to the financial interests of the major corporations.\"27 Indeed, there are social and political regulations Press, 2008). See also Ulrich Beck, « C'est le mythe du progrès et de la sécurité qui est en train de s'effondrer », Le Monde, 25.03.2011. 27 Patrick O'Connor, Nuclear Power, Private Ownership and the Profit System, 24 March 2011, http://www.wsws.org/articles/2011/mar2011/persm24.shtml 230 Ana Bazac constraining the technological treatment of risks.28 But we should not forget that technological change is, or could be, anticipated from a technical standpoint. The replication of technique is predictable. If one does not give full scope to anticipation and predictability, it is because of nontechnological reasons. The framework created by these reasons has damaging consequences on the lives of millions of human persons, and the ability of these persons to understand the real stakes of social facts and political decisions is weakened by the media and a handful of professionals, who inject scepticism about the warnings of scientists29 and stir doubt concerning the scientific data and facts.30 The result of such a civilization, where poverty coexists with a shameful waste31 and the ecological challenges could, at least to a certain extent, be integrated into the functioning of the profit system,32 is the contradiction between so many theories providing illusions about the worth of the human person as opposed to the real situation of so many persons. For the time being, some researchers offer the theories which counterpose the impersonal risks to the model of risk conscience society,33 of sustainable economy beyond growth,34 of eco-sufficiency and ecological economics,35 of the common good,36 or the French model of décroissance. In all of these models, present mainstream neo-classical economics is replaced with revised concepts of economy, society, and progress, subordinated to the worth of every human person as the only way to demonstrate the worth of man. 28 Isabelle Stengers, Au temps des catastrophes. Résister à la barbarie qui vient (Paris: La Découverte, 2009). 29 Jules Boykoff, Reheating the Climate Change Story, 30 January 2011, http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/jan/30/climatechange-climate-change-scepticism 30 Naomi Oreskes & Erik M. Conway, Merchants of Doubt (N.Y.: Bloomsbury Press, 2010). 31 Michel Rocard, Dominique Bourg et Floran Augagneur, « Le genre humain, menacé, » Le Monde, 2 avril 2011. 32 See the old observation of André Gorz, „Leur écologie et la notre,\" Les Temps modernes, mars 1974. 33 Jean-Pierre Dupuy, Pour un catastrophisme éclairé, Quand l'impossible est certain (Paris: Seuil, 2004). 34 Herman E. Daly, Beyond Growth: The Economics of Sustainable Development (Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press, 1997). 35 Tim Jackson, Prosperity Without Growth: Economics for a Finite Planet (London: Earthcan, 2009). 36 Herman E. Daly and John B. Cobb Jr., For the Common Good: Redirecting the Economy toward Community, the Environment, and a Sustainable Future (Boston, Mass.: Beacon Press, 1994). On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 231 Worth of the Human Person The change of civilization realized by science and technology is not only a technological one; the change is out of the range of the \"natural\" order of things. In other words, the ontological change itself is sociological, because the power relations of the present society are framing the technological transformation: they are choosing its criteria, the rhythm of the changes, the domains of the preliminary application, the human persons selected as being able to face the challenges of the process, to conduct or manage it, to be considered as preferred models or disputable mirrors. The change under discussion takes place on a large scale, from the present chemical, biological, nano-technological manipulation of the human mind to the explicit intention of connecting the \"natural\" human mind with AI, and finally to the creation of what is called engineered singularity. Consequently, one could affirm that there is not only a logical discontinuity in the treatment and evolution of man – discontinuity realized through engineered singularity – but also continuity, as in sequential chemical, biological, nano-technological procedures participating in the ontological construction of man and the ontological transformation of the human being. This aspect of continuity is, again, not only the result of scientific and technological discoveries, but it goes on as part of political intentionality from inside \"late modernity\" (Mandel, Habermas). From a philosophical standpoint, the importance of this double determinism, technological and political, has to be highlighted. The worth of man is obviously challenged when confronting the concept and extension of possibility. Technologically, if something can be done, it will be: the guiding marks of the possibility of man would belong only to the inner logic of technology. But even this logic is legitimized by the traditional concept about the world of man: the return of the acceleration of scientific and technological discoveries37 are conceived of as aiming at the increase of consumption and profits, all human values being subordinated to the implicit reasoning that if something can be bought, then it will be beneficial. In fact, the technological transformation of man, and especially of his mind, follows the social logic of power relations. This phenomenon suggests that keeping the worth of man is manifold, and the intertwining contradictions faced by this desire to keep the worth of man cannot be ignored. One example is the precedent of the industrialization of health care. Leaving aside the excessive interpretation of both the author and the reader, we should not forget that Ivan Illich38 showed that the result of the 37 Ray Kurzweil, The Law of Accelerating Returns, 2001, http://www.kurzweilai.net/the-law-of-accelerating-returns 38 Ivan Illich, Limits to Medicine. Medical Nemesis: The Expropriation of Health (1976) (London: Marion Boyars Publisher, 2000). 232 Ana Bazac industrialization of health care is pain and sickness, and restricts the vital autonomy of people. This result is iatrogenesis: the transformation of man into a dependent being and, at the same time, impregnated by illness induced by industrialized medicine and pharmacy. This is a social phenomenon generated not by the mere logic of medical discoveries, but one of the social frameworks within which these discoveries take place. \"Iatrogenesis cannot be understood unless it is seen as the specifically medical manifestation of specific counterproductivity. Specific or paradoxical counterproductivity is a negative social indicator for a diseconomy which remains locked within the system that produces it... The recovery from a society-wide iatrogenic disease is a political task, not a professional one.\"39 By using this pattern of understanding – which is consonant with Gödel's theory that the last explanation of a system lies outside it –, we could obviously extrapolate it to many fields. One is, for example, the industrialization of food and distribution of food. The counter-productivity of these processes has to be considered when we speak about the worth of man and the values involved and supported by a being whose worth is cherished. But let us pass to the present chemical, biological, and nanotechnological manipulation of the human mind. This manipulation is related to both military and consumerist economic interests,40 and following its procedures, not only are cures developing, but also deeper dependencies. If the former example was sketched in Plato's systemic prefigure41 of man as having to develop moderation and prudence as main values supporting the harmony of mind and body, warnings linked to the technological manipulation of the human mind are related to modern theories from Francis Bacon to post-Freudism. At a general level, the result of these processes is the first transformation of man as possibilitas to exist as such.42 Leaving Heidegger aside, the processes point out the consequences of technological possiblities: the emergence of a new superhuman being according to which the entire environment will be transformed, and new significances of this environment and its clash with the new rational being will be grasped. The 39 Ibid., pp. 8, 6. 40 While Nicolas Georgescu-Roegen, \"Energy and Economic Myths,\" Southern Economic Journal, 41, no. 3, January 1975, http://dieoff.org/page148.htm, wrote that from the standpoint of power economy, \"the production of all instruments of war, not only of war itself, should be prohibited completely.\" 41 See Plato, Gorgias, 464d, 456a-b, 518c-d, and Republic, 376e, 404b-c, 372a, 372c-d, 373b-c, 373d, 373e, 425e, 426a. 42 Logos meaning what-is-made-to-be-seen, the essence of being, and what we see is always the same – the being – and different, as possibility to exist as such, see Martin Heidegger, ibid.. On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 233 direction of nanotechnology and neuroscience constitutes one scenario leading to the rise of engineered singularity. By again coming back to Heidegger, the action over the possibilitas of man changes this possibilitas itself: man, that is, his subjectivity, becomes the object of manipulation, thus no longer seeming to be its subject. This scenario is obviously the application of scientific principles to the structures with which man is dealing. The scientific principles are the result of man's research and discoveries, and to apply them intelligently (with ingenium, generated by ingenium) means to create new entities using physical laws. The development of engineering concerning the human being generates not only an improved body by replacing ill or nonfunctioning parts with artificial devices – thus illustrating Descartes' metaphor of the human body as a machine43 – but also an improved mind. In its simplest model, the mind itself proves to be a machine – a set of reactions to parameters of inputs – and thus it could be accorded with artificial models of human intelligence. The artificial intelligence (AI) created first in the world of computational devices, external to the human person, comes to be engrafted to the natural mind. Human reason receives the unlimited capabilities of AI, and, since conscience is the differentia specifica of man in the family of animals (he is sapiens sapiens), the new combination of the genuine human mind and AI gives birth to a new kind of \"man\": the engineered one. This engineered man – rather, this engineered mind – becomes a new singularity,44 as the vector of the future of all the discoveries and transformations of kosmos and logos. But concretely speaking about every human person, and surpassing the level of theories, it would be worth noting that the social conditions of the realization and generalization of the discoveries related to engineered singularity are intertwined with the hierarchy of the social conditions of the realization and generalization of a dignified life for a larger and larger number of human persons. As these last conditions are contradictory, excluding millions from the realization of humanness \"in the comparatively humble sense of pleasure and freedom from pain, and in the higher meaning of rendering life – not what it now is almost universally, puerile and insignificant – but such as human beings with highly developed faculties can care to have,\"45 as the imagined realization and generalization of the 43 See Ana Bazac, \"The machine motif in Descartes,\" Noesis, XXXV, 2010, pp. 71-87. 44 This new singularity could become immortal for the time being by uploading the brain's contents to a silicon support and then download it again into a new body. See Terrence Aym, http://www.helium.com/items/2029699mind-uploading-immortality?page=2. Also The Digital Immortality Institute (DII). 45 J. Stuart Mill, The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume VIII, \"A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, Being a Connected View of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of Scientific Investigation (Books 234 Ana Bazac discoveries related to engineered singularity – the destiny of a large number of anonymous human persons. Concretely, some scientific discoveries would have been helpful to the life of the human person worldwide, if these discoveries had not been treated economically from a short term private profit standpoint. We should not forget that, through the mediation of financing, many discoveries were postponed, and many even annulled; and that, by the agency of the same financing, some discoveries are channelled into an irrational and wasting use. The worth of the human person is quite low when the scientists' warning about the necessity of bio-economic economy while seeing to the industrial comfort of the present generations by also seeing to the survival of the future by a pollution-free and rational use of energy and resources is neglected. The simple analysis of the financial funding of alternative energy research counter-posed to the armament and war expenditure46 illustrates this conclusion. For this reason, to discuss it only in terms of old benevolent intentions and theories concerning the human person is no longer sufficient. A theory which sets off the difference of phase between theory and practice is needed. Time Singularity research shows that the anticipation of unpredictable facts is related to the problem of time, mainly to the propitious interval to question and develop singularity. In the Greek tradition, the opportune moment, kairos, is the only propitious interval to act, specifically, to act IV-VI and Appendices),\" ed. J. M. Robson, Introduction by R.F. McRae, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974), Book VI, Chapter XII,http://oll.libertyfund.org/index.php?option=com_ _staticxt&staticfile=show.php%3Ftitle=247&layout=html#chapter_40043 . 46 Global military spending hits high but growth slows, April 10, 2011, http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/04/10/military-spending-idUSLDE733228 20110410: \"Worldwide military spending edged up in 2010 to a record $1.6 trillion... Global spending rose 1.3 percent in real terms, a slowdown from 5.9 percent the year before as the economic downturn caused by the 2008 financial crisis hit military spending... U.S. spending +2.8 percent, European spending 2.8 percent...The Unites States, with costly military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, increased spending by 2.8 percent to $698 billion – about six times as much as China, the second-biggest spender, ahead of Britain, France and Russia. In 2009, U.S. spending grew 7.7 percent...The United States has increased its military spending by 81 percent since 2001...At 4.8 percent of gross domestic product, U.S. military spending in 2010 represents the largest economic burden outside the Middle East.\" On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 235 efficiently. If one loses time by delaying the realization of big discoveries,47 one loses human lives and humanly-lived lives.48 The decision concerning the kairos, rhythm, and content of developing singularity does not depend only on scientists (thus on the specific logic of science), but on politicians taking part in the power relations. Regardless of how they are persuaded by visionary researchers, politicians reflect the short term political criteria to judge the efficiency of the development of big discoveries and post-human state of man. This observation, based on the coexistence in the last 30 years of an exponential rhythm of apex science combined with the increase of wars, suffering, social diseases, and troubles, the ecological crisis, and the quest for natural resources, aims only to put a precautionary brake on the dreams concerning singularity. The scientific and technological revolution is real, but depends ultimately on political interests: what kind of discoveries and where they are to be implemented. For this reason, the attitudes of common people, their education and enlargement of horizon, (including the political one), and thus the development of their rationalism \"all the way,\" are important factors to counter-press the interests of domination and to realize singularity. The scientific revolution is not the only one in our society. But \"a revolution may be ripe, and yet the forces of its creators may prove insufficient to carry it out, in which case society decays, and this process of decay sometimes drags on for very many years.\"49 Constructed from a social viewpoint, this representation is somehow similar to Bøstrom's possible trajectory of the future development of technology as \"a stasis at (or close to) the current status quo.\"50 But, as this trajectory would be improbable according to singularity theorists, a huge problem for philosophy still remains: why does the explosion of knowledge and technological realizations coexist with so many signs of social decay, suffering, and injustice? And would the paradigm of engineered singularity be sufficient for the future representation of man? What kind of society is 47 See Nick Bøstrom, Astronomical Waste: The Opportunity Cost of Delayed Technological Development, 2003, http://www.nickbostrom.com/astro nomical/waste.html 48 I doubt that this humanly lived life would mean to be happy (only) through \"safe and effective methods of controlling the brain circuitry responsible for subjective well-being\", Nick Bostrom, \"The Future of Humanity,\" in Jan Kyrre Berg Olsen, Evan Selinger, and Søren Riis (Eds.), New Waves in Philosophy of Technology (New York: Palgrave McMillan, 2009), see http://www.nickbostrom.com/papers/future.pdf, p. 16, quoting David Pearce, The Hedonistic Imperative, 2004, http://www.hedweb.com/hedab.htm. Besides this aspect, I agree with Pearce on many points. 49 Lenin, \"The Latest in Iskra Tactics, or Mock Elections as a New Incentive to an Uprising\", 1905, http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/ /oct/17b.htm. 50 Nick Bøstrom, The Future of Humanity, 2007, http://www.nickbostrom.com/papers/future.pdf, p. 15. 236 Ana Bazac allowed by technological singularity? What is the luddite tendency51 within the futurist literature, which is quite different from the man's lack of power to control and manage his technological results? Does the popular concern about technology and human power not superpose the academic one? Are they not surprisingly similar? And do we not need a social view as a meta one (as the technological one is)? Indeed, \"transhumanism offers (what one might call) the safest unsafe passage into the future, that is, compared to the alternatives specified\" (for it attacks the epistemic or cognitive obstacles against the stopping of the trend toward the extinction of humanity).52 In this respect, it is a necessary warning that our society has not yet attained the Type 1 civilization in the Kardashev scale. But it has to do with less waste and human suffering. The Threshold Upon Which We Find Ourselves Taking into account the present social conditions worldwide, the starting point is the predominance of capital as the unique manager of the right to existence of whoever and whatever, thus of whatever possible future: every possible fact has either to adapt to this condition or disappear. Consequently, the engineering of man has to consider this social framework and, obviously, to question it. This attitude is necessary in order to efficiently navigate between the Scylla of pessimism53 and the Charybdis of technological optimism. Indeed, engineered singularity implicitly presupposes the old model of \"human evil by nature.\" Since the present society is at least contradictory, if not difficultly flattering for a rational being, only a post-human status would solve the problems issued from the former irrational status (but would it?). To surpass this pessimism and not to fall down in technophile imagery54 is 51 See Bill Joy, Why the Future Doesn't Need Us, http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy.html 52 Philippe Verdoux, \"Transhumanism, Progress and the Future\", Journal of Evolution & Technology, 20 (2), 2009, p. 60 (http://jetpress.org/v20/verdoux. htm). 53 A form of pessimism is the retro prescription – renunciation to the technological progress; another one – paternalism, where the control of technologies belongs to a limited number of decision-makers; see the critique of pessimism in David Brin, Singularities and Nightmares: Extremes of Optimism and Pessimism about the Human Future, http://lifeboat.com/ex/singu larities.and.nightmares. 54 Technophilia is the ideological trend which asserts that the progress of technology would somehow solve automatically the social problems of humankind. We have to note that Marx's theory about the determinism of the productive forces over the productive relations is not at all technophile. Let us remember the feed-back of the productive relations and the principle that \"No social order is ever destroyed before all the productive forces for which it is sufficient have been developed, and new superior relations of production never On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 237 possible through the social standpoint. Otherwise, technological optimism without questioning the social framework of the implementation of such a revolutionary technology is a deus ex machina type of reasoning. Indeed, science would be the last messianic hope in a secularized society. The literary trope deus ex machina is, however, a kind of laic deviation from religion as such. It consists in putting forward an improbable event to intervene in the evolution of facts, but the author, and the spectators as well, know perfectly that this deed is a fiction, and that they have to admit this fiction only for the sake of the drama as such. Unfortunately, real life is not equivalent to a play; therefore people know that they have to strain their efforts in order to become themselves the \"machine\"55 ordering the course of life. From this standpoint (and secondly), technophile optimism by those who do not join the technical aspects to the social ones is a mixture between a religious impulse and a deus ex machina symptom: it suggests a kind of hope that a fragmentary approach, as necessary as it is at a first level of science, would solve a unitary or total problem; and also a kind of postponement within one's own replace older ones before the material conditions for their existence have matured within the framework of the old society\", Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Preface, 1859, http://www.marxists.org/ archive/marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/preface.htm. Abundance, thus the suppression of rarity, is the result of technological development. But, if rarity is the ontological figure of mankind (Sartre), abundance does not follow automatically from the technological development: rather, it is mediated by the social relations and institutions. This is the reason why Marx was not preoccupied with rarity and abundance, but with their causes and conditions. Concerning the above-mentioned capital as the main social condition of the forging of the future, it is noteworthy that the model of salvation from the dangers menacing mankind is, in literature or movies, copying the capitalist model of relations and mentalities. 55 The Greek μηχανή – ingenious invention, machine of theatre, with stopgap, slyness, artifice. Μή is the root signifying a negation in a hypothetical sense, meaning that the thing one speaks about would be uncertain, presumed, and even inadmissible. From this root, an entire family of words emerged: μηχαναω – to imagine, to arrange with art, to combine for a precise purpose, whence to produce, to cause, to occasion (as well as in negative senses: to conspire; μηχανεύς – invention, ingenuity; μηχάνευσις – apparatus, device; μηχάνησις – machine; μηχάνημα – ingenious invention, mechanism, machinery; μηχάνητικoς – able to invent; μηχανικός – able to work, constructed by the art of the mechanic (engineer), the art to construct a machine. In this sense, Irving John Good, Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine, 1965, http://www.stat.vt.edu/tech_reports/2005/Good TechReport.pdf, wrote that man would construct within his own mind the principles which form the architecture of the new super-intelligent machine: \"man will construct the deus ex machina in his own image\". 238 Ana Bazac conscience of the necessity to frontally surpass the fragmentary. In fact, technophile optimism is only a characteristic of thinking, far from a lack of respectability. It has different consequences, and the problem is to maximize the good ones, by completing the foresight of big technological discoveries with social features. The idea assumed here is that present trends in the development of technology are opposing the political structure of society, and this contradictory coexistence prepares a contradictory future. Consequently, political responsibility is as important as scientific and technological competence. If so, the questions and answers have to transgress a somehow abstract level which deals with man as an individual. In this respect, a major problem is the representation of future relationships between engineered singularity and its engineered fellows; between engineered singularity and society (what kind of society could issue from the historical bifurcation that will be engineered singularity?); between engineered singularity and culture. Another question is how engineered singularities will master their sentiments, how strong these will be, and, if it ever constitutes itself, which form of belonging to community/society/world it will have. And because domination/submission has not only been the fundamental social relationship but also the means to taming people and to accord them to the level of civilization, will engineered singularity ever be more tamed? If this taming does not mean subordination and disciplined atomization, then the application of (post)human rights has to be observed. Consequently, the present relationships between the dominant ends of private property and the model of man have to be considered. Do we imagine future engineered singularity on the mass level as mentally impoverished as many of the present average people because of the restrictions imposed by the intellectual property on free and high standard information? And, because present individuals feel they would be passive objects of the macroprocesses exceeding them,56 how will future engineered singularities surpass this situation, if ever? The acute awareness of the threshold we are on does not follow from an idealistic view about intelligence shared by the researchers of singularity,57 but from a very pragmatic interest: that of giving the effort to control the evolution of technological singularity as much creativity as humankind can manifest and offer. Any loss or waste of human lives and possible human creativity weakens to a great extent the human answer to 56 Miguel Benasayag, « Information, réflexion, discussion », La Revue mensuelle n° 86 Robotique, vie artificielle, réalité virtuelle, http://www.admiroutes.asso.fr/larevue/2007/86/chroniquebbl.htm. 57 See Why Work Toward the Singularity, http://singinst.org/overview/Whyworktowardthesingularity/: the \"transition of intelligent life on Earth to a smarter and rapidly improving civilization with an enormously higher standard of living\". On the Threshold of Human Technological Transformation 239 engineered singularity and seems to repeat the kind of primitive attitude manifested until now and even at present: the attitude of those who lead the destiny of society without counting the suffering and death of the ruled, or who consider this suffering and death as inherent and \"collateral damage,\" \"compensated\" by the \"general progress of civilization.\" But could we accept this type of judgment, at the present level of technological evolution and scientific conscience? From its techno-centric perspective, the theory and, moreover, the movement of technological singularity seems to counterpose to this judgment a humanistic preoccupation, care, and confidence. In which direction, then, would the human be transformed? Which are the ethical, practical, and technological aspects of this transformation? And would this process contribute to man's rising on superior levels of intelligence and humanism, or, on the contrary, to his descending to lowerthan-human stages? What global catastrophes are possible through AI technological developments and how could they be avoided? What will the future of intelligent life be? Which methods and compulsions would this intelligent life face, and what kinds of solutions will the new AI and nanotechnologies need to find? But now we are only in the waiting-room of the possible end of man's own creation. This situation only pushes us toward the deeper understanding of the significance, both positive and negative, of the actions about which human is wondering. Faculty of Philosophy Polytechnic University of Bucharest Bucharest, Romania ana_bazac@hotmail.com\n\nCHAPTER XVIII SOCIAL NETWORK SITES: A MICROANALYSIS OF THE INVOLVEMENT OF YOUNG EUROPEANS SEBASTIAN CHIRIMBU Abstract: The present study examines the issue of European youth's social involvement in relation to the same generation's deep relationship with communication technology and furthermore with the social network sites supported by this fast developing technology. It is a fact that young Europeans are showing a profound lack of interest in civic and social issues. What we are trying to examine is whether communication technology and social network sites might be used as a tool for increasing young Europeans' involvement in the \"life of the city.\" Keywords: changing European society, social and political involvement, Generation Y, networking, online civic actions. Motto: \"European youth is the Union's most valuable resource.\" Globalization and the Internet The most outstanding technological and social event of the twentieth century was the invention of the internet. The development of the internet depended obviously on technology, but not only that. It was equally influenced by social factors, which merged with the technological ones so that the internet became what it is today. Once installed in the fibers of society, the internet has been continually producing new consequences on society. The most important of them is the process of globalization, and we can state without question that this has been supported and accelerated by the internet. The informational society is an internet-based society, and therefore it comes as a logical consequence to say that globalization is a phenomenon specific to the informational society. Due to the link between globalization and the informational society, which is an ever-developing process, globalization also appears as a developing, unstoppable phenomenon. The internet is also the result of social interaction among specialists, institutions, states, and a large number of individual users all over the world; it is only in this context that its tremendous development can be conceived, as a technological and social invention, and globalization will in its turn be a phenomenon involving participants from all over the world. This is the lesson taught by the internet, which has proven to be a great success in the technological and social history of mankind, showing the path to be followed by the globalization process, which is everybody's 242 Sebastian Chirimbu participation in ways that are to be generated to a great extent by the users of globalization themselves. Just like the internet, globalization cannot be strictly hierarchical; both phenomena should be ruled by general forms of coordination, unanimously accepted, which might become possible only in a society of knowledge and maybe of consciousness. The facts that two forms of intellectual attitudes have already occurred, Davos and Porto Alegre, and a third one is also manifested as street protests against globalization, show us that the process of globalization has not yet found its balance, although it is pushed forward by the development of the internet and its massive utilization in the economic, cultural, and social life of the globe. The Internet and the Social Networks From a specialized platform destined to be used by specialists in narrow areas, the internet has become the most important and widespread communication service in the world. We can speak about real time interconnectivity at a level hard to imagine a decade ago, and this is only the beginning. Practically speaking, the social networks hosted by the internet represent a global way of communication, offering at the same time a good control over the content over the messages which are sent. What do all the social networks have in common? There are a few dominant characteristics: they co-exist in an environment with an enormous communication potential; their use is friendly and creative; they offer fast interaction with high efficiency; physical borders become irrelevant; linguistic barriers become less important as users tend to accept an international language as a code for transmitting their messages. There are hundreds of relevant active networks in this moment to which other small or medium-sized networks add. Facebook, Twitter, MySpace, Netlog, Linkedin, Hi5, Neogen, and, of course, blogs, are just a few examples of such networks among the hundreds of important ones which offer opportunities in the fields of business, head hunting, personal development, leadership, new relationships, games, etc. Social networks appear thus to be interaction structures among actors in an exchange relationship, the type of network being given by the nature of the relationship.1 Among the potential benefits of network sites we can mention the following:2 professional success; business development; access to knowledge; information; a larger number of opportunities; network development; personal development; debates; the building of communities 1 Mircea Mitruţiu (2005, p. 9), Analysis of social networks / Analiza reţelelelor sociale, Banat Bussines, [online], available at: http://www.banatbusiness.ro/_ files/edit_texte/fisiere/Analiza_retelelor_sociale.pdf> [accessed on Nov. 24, 2010]. 2 Ibid., p. 125. A Microanalysis of the Involvement of Young Europeans 243 brought together by a common interest; and cheap and easy communication. We cannot end the present section of the paper without mentioning that there are, of course, possible shortcomings of social networks as well, such as limitations of the digital platform, stolen identities, spams, and problems of adaptation to the real environment. Facebook – an Agent of Globalization? In an interdisciplinary approach, the Facebook social network exercises deep implications on the economic, political, and social life of the globalized world in which we live. In the context of the new forms of communication, which have become highly relevant in contemporary society, the Facebook phenomenon is a distinct chapter. Besides being anything else, Facebook is an agent of globalization and due to it, the global village we live in becomes virtually coherent in the infosphere. In other words, Facebook is a mental map of globalization, maybe the most eloquent one. No other online initiative has enjoyed such a global impact as Mark Zuckerberg's Facebook. The process of globalization cannot be conceived in the absence of the internet in general and of Facebook in particular. Facebook becomes a virtual place where we are permanently in contact with our friends all over the world, with personalities, and with different organizations. We are their neighbors, at a click's distance from them. Facebook is an indispensable instrument for bloggers and journalists, for artists and writers, for those involved in political actions or in actions of the civil society for certain public institutions or companies. Many domains of activity nowadays would not be possible in the absence of Facebook. The way young people spend their free time has changed radically in the last decades; books, sports, and television no longer enjoy the same public fan base. However, the use of Facebook as part of the global communication process has tended to become a way of living in itself, influencing our behavior, decisions, feelings, etc. Human beings cannot live their lives without expressing themselves, and from this point of view Facebook offers numerous possibilities. The pictures, the music we display, the articles we comment upon, all speak about our personality and our desire to share these experiences with other people. Facebook also means knowledge as part of an euristic process. Our virtual presence offers us the opportunity – once inconceivable – of an interaction with a very large number of persons all at once. An opinion expressed on Facebook or a question we ask can receive fast and easy feedback from a lawyer, professor, writer, a professional, from a liberal, a conservative, or a socialist, be him/her Chinese or Canadian, etc. Based on these criteria the feedback differs and can help us understand aspects of a situation we had not thought of until then. 244 Sebastian Chirimbu Of course, the network is still young and we cannot know for sure if it is just a passing trend, a momentary fashion, or a lasting phenomenon. A Microanalysis – European Youth's Social Involvement In this part we try to examine the issue of European youth's social involvement in relation to the same generation's deep relationship with communication technology and with the social network sites supported by this fast-developing technology. The theoretical background we use will be supported by a research study conducted in the period May-June 2011 on a sample group made up of 100 young people (undergraduate and graduate students) aged 18-26. Two main characteristics of today's young generation depicted by numerous social, cultural, political, and anthropological studies are their special relationship with communication technology and their new communicational features on one hand; their low involvement in the \"life of the city,\" with weak political and societal interests on the other. Whether there is a connection, a cause-effect relationship between the two realities is what we are going to discuss in the following lines. The first step in our attempt is to define the target group making up the object of the present study. The contemporary young generation has been given various names, such as \"Generation Y,\" the \"Millennials,\" \"Generation Next,\" or the \"Facebook Generation,\" in an attempt to enter and decode their world to the benefit of the whole society. They are the generation born between the late 1970s and early 1990s, although this time interval varies from one country to another, from the USA to Romania and the rest of Europe. This is the digital generation, whose representatives have grown along with the computer and the other technological developments about which they are so expert and to which they are so addicted. But while the computer was a common item in the early 90s in Western Europe and the USA, in Romania only the children born after 1990 have had the opportunity of benefiting from modern technology in their first decade of life. The European young generation has witnessed and has been living in a fast-changing, fast-developing environment; the double nature of this process of change – political and economic on one hand and communicational on the other – has certainly been influencing the way the young generation conceives of social and political action and involvement. The democratization process has faced many obstacles in countries from South-Eastern Europe, where many changes have taken place at different levels: political, economic, institutional, and in everyday life, where a slight change regarding the mentality and civic and political behavior has been noticed. Therefore, one of the main targets of many EU policies and funded programs is to lead young people to become active citizens, to play an active role in society. A Microanalysis of the Involvement of Young Europeans 245 Social and political transformations, produced in many European Union countries (including Romania) in the last decades, have generated various problems, which the younger generation faces. But notwithstanding the changes and emerging opportunities in the development of pluralist democracy, the level of youth participation in public life and politics is not very high. Today we are eyewitnesses to what we could call a crisis in European society, namely its members' – especially the young ones – lack of involvement in European or national politics. The great potential the young generation has would allow them to develop themselves and contribute to society's development, successfully including the leading of their own destiny, but most of European young people seem not to not have full confidence in their own powers. However, young people, through their positive thinking, dynamism and energy, ambitions and aspirations to a more prosperous future, should be the driving force in a changing European society (a dynamic, complex society). If we analyze the surveys performed by EU countries, we notice that 30% of young people say that they do not know what the future holds, 10% confess that they live only for today, 20% of them believe that the future will not be good, 16% believe that the future will be more depressing than the present, and only 24% of young respondents hope the future will bring them a better life than the present one. Most European young people seem to have lost their hope for a prosperous life. They do not believe in promises, nor do they feel they have the power to change anything, although the European policy encourages decision-making processes and participation in various debates. This position is shown by the data of a Public Opinion Barometer (POB), where 32.6% to 35.2% of young people aged between 18-29 years answered the question \"How do you think people like you can influence important decisions taken at national level?\" using \"to a small extent,\" \"to a very small extent,\" and \"not at all.\" The distance between the young people, public institutions, and the democratic process is probably due to the lack the tradition of youth participation in some EU countries regarding the building of a democratic and prosperous society. Young people eventually become indifferent to social and political life. For example, most young people in Romania's academic environment distance themselves from policy more and more, and they are not interested in political or economic events taking place in the country, although Romania needs the involvement of civil society now, and particularly of young people. Despite the very different situations, young people share similar values and difficulties, and they often speak with one voice: they want their dreams and expectations to come true. \"The colossal World Values Survey shows that only one-third of young people across Europe are interested in politics, and three-quarters said they did not think politics are important for their lives. Only a minority of young people were shown to have actually engaged in politics – 28% had 246 Sebastian Chirimbu signed a petition, 22% had attended a demonstration, and 9% had joined boycotts. Only 6% belonged to a political party, a trade union, an environmental organization, or a professional association\" (Kaila Krayewski, Generation Y and Why They Matter, 2009). There has been widespread fear that they are disengaging from politics, instead tending to focus on their own immediate surroundings while blocking out seemingly distant problems. It seems that only a rather small part of this generation, born during the economic boom, but struggling to make a way during the economic crisis, is eager to be involved in the community life. That is why the main target of many EU policies and funded programs is to train young people to become active citizens, to play an active role in society because they have something to offer. As compared to their predecessors, the young generation can not only listen and execute, but can force a change in the contents of things. As far as the young generation's relationship with communication technology and social network sites is concerned, existing research (Valenzuela: 2008) points out that young people are motivated to join such sites to keep a strong relationship with friends and equally to strengthen relationships with acquaintances and ultimately, but less importantly, to meet new people online. Social networks or social communities such as Facebook, Hi5.com, YouTube, MySpace, Xing, or Friendster are currently the most popular ways of meeting people. These networks meet the young people's need for communication; help them develop/find their identity, (re)present themselves, and practice peer-group experiences; offer them spaces of freedom and experimentation, crossing any boundaries. The popularity of these communities could be explained by children's and young people's needs to be noticed, recognized, and to become popular. They want to be seen and, in the same time, to see how appreciated and sympathetic they are – or how they seem to be. We have conducted a practical research study among a target group of 100 young Romanians aged between 18-26, all of them undergraduate (73) or graduate (27) students, in order to find out more information on the way they integrate social network sites in their involvement into public life and in the civic action they take. The main criteria for choosing the respondents were: their age and their membership to a social network site. The questions we asked the respondents were: Q1: Do you use the social network to comment on / discuss public issues or you use it only for discussing private issues? Q2: Are you a member of any civic organization / NGO (NonGovernment Organization) having a profile on the social network site(s) whose member you are? A Microanalysis of the Involvement of Young Europeans 247 Q3: Do you participate in the actions organized by such civic organizations / NGOs a) on the social network site(s); b) in the non-virtual environment (meetings, actions with various purposes)? The answers we have received were as follows: Q1: 62 respondents (62%) answered that they use a social network site to comment on public issues as well as on private issues, while the other 38% use the social network sites only for discussing private issues. Of the two categories, 42 undergraduate respondents and 20 graduate students gave a positive answer. Q2: 5 respondents (5%) (2 undergraduates and 3 graduates) answered that they were members of a civic organization / NGO. Q3: 46 respondents answered that they participate in actions3 / debates organized by civic organizations / NGO on the social network site (28 undergraduates and respectively 18 graduates) and 1 undergraduate respectively 2 graduate students answered that they participate in actions4 organized by civic organizations / NGOs in the non-virtual environment. Question (Q) Total number of positive answers Undergraduates Graduates Q1 62 / 100 (62%) 42 / 73 (57.5%) 20 / 27 (74%) Q2 5 / 100 (5%) 2 / 73 (2.7%) 3 / 27 (11.1%) Q3a 46 / 100 (46%) 28 / 73 (38.3%) 18 / 27 (66.6%) Q3b 3 / 100 (3%) 1 / 73 (1.3%) 2 / 27 (7.4%) It becomes obvious from the above-mentioned figures that age and the degree of maturity play an important role in the way the young generation gets involved in public issues. As far as the topic of our study is concerned, we believe that the figures demonstrate that although public involvement is indeed low among young people, social network sites are a useful environment for creating civic consciousness and increasing public involvement among young people. It is a generation whose thinking patterns are fundamentally different from those of the previous generations, mostly due to the different way of thinking and processing information due to a technological boom. Their learning preferences, their motivation, and their expectations from education are different, and while they are seen as \"growing without values,\" they have something new to offer: directness, pragmatic goals, high expectations, fast achievements. Organizations fighting for a public cause should reshape and redesign their strategies for reaching those goals if they want to attract the young generation and gain their support. 3 Voting, signing petitions, supporting a public cause financially / nonfinancially etc. 4 Voluntary activities, support or protest meetings/ marches etc. 248 Sebastian Chirimbu \"Spiru Haret\" University Department of Specialised Languages Bucharest, Romania sebastian_chirimbu@yahoo.com CHAPTER XIX PHILOSOPHICAL REFLECTION ON THE ETHICS OF NETWORK INFORMATION GONG QUN Abstract: We are living in an era of network information and the coming of this era has changed man's living and communicating styles. The anonymity of the world of network information has changed the character of human ethical life, paving the way for net crime. With maximum selfinterest, people participate in the construction and development of the world of network information, but unrestricted pursuit of maximum self-interest will eventually lead to the sufferings brought on by this behavior – thus, restrictive pursuit is the best choice. The Contractarianism of Hobbes and Gauthier offers the philosophical premise for the ethics of network information. Seen on the horizon, Contractarianism, the equal and freedomrestrictive pursuit of the right to self-interest, is the basic principle of citizens of the society of network information, and respecting this right is the most fundamental principle of the ethics of network information. Keywords: ethic of network information, prisoner's dilemma, Contractarianism I. It is said that the twenty-first century is one supported by cyberspace. We are now living in an era of information and the Net; an era based on the creation and allocation of information; an era of World Wide Web when the holistic survival state of mankind is experiencing fundamental change. Network information has enlarged our living space, dissolved the obstacles brought about by distance, and gathered people far from each other all over the globe together. The Internet has changed our lives as well as our life styles, and it has also brought change to our ethical life. We are now living in double worlds. With the appearance of the Net era, there appears a world of network information which joins our real world. Are the two worlds, then, identical? The existence of the Net World is objective which, nevertheless, is different from the actual objective world, being one of multiple information and fictitiousness. Such a fictitious world blended with one of information is also an important part of human life-world, just like the actual human social world. The Net World is, first and foremost, a world of information. With an unimaginably vast capacity, the Internet contains the information of the human world far more than any other carrier. It offers an unprecedented availability of information to people, and the world thus has entered into an information explosion. Secondly, the high speed of the communication of 250 Gong Qun network information has accelerated the pace of globalization. It can even be said that network information has contributed to the coming of the era of globalization. Thirdly, the Net World is fictitious. This so-called fictitiousness refers to its being able to invent a lively world by way of images and animations. Fourthly, the Net World is also one where people interact and communicate with one another. Mutual communication is strengthened via the Net. The Internet has changed man's way of communication in that it has changed people's communicating style and, simultaneously, produced a new type of human communication: that between human and computer. Fifthly, the Net World is a commercial one. Internet qua the platform for commodity exchange has changed the traditional exchanging mode, having greatly facilitated the exchange of commodities and widened the market space. Where there is human life-world, there are human crimes and issues of human ethics and morals. Similarly, at the same time network information has changed human life and brought great convenience and happiness therewith, it has also created unprecedented problems regarding human crime and ethics. The human ethical and moral system gradually formed over the past several millenniums is suffering great conflicts and seems to have lost its meaning in view of the world of network information. An overview of the current world shows that such immoral, even criminal, phenomena such as net crime, network information fraud and piracy, digital destruction, the rampant spread of computer viruses, the overflowing of net sex information, the infestation of hackers, privacy suffering outrageous infringement, and other such crimes are trampling the moral boundaries of people. These have made the problems of information ethics a crisis and challenge we cannot but face. It has become a special ethical task of people today to construct a system of information ethics and maintain a healthy and ordered Net world. II. The phenomenon of human ethics and morals is so common that moral evaluations can and must be made as to good and evil in all fields of endeavor. Seen in the sense of sociological description, information ethics refers to the study of ethics and morals in the sphere of network information; seen in the theoretical sense of the normative applied ethics, on the other hand, it refers to how man should act and what principles and norms he should follow in the sphere of network information. Put on the level of philosophy, the study focuses on the philosophical premises of norms and principles in the reign of network information, asking why such principles should be used to instruct people's behavior. Rather than making an anthropological description of the ethical and moral phenomena in the sphere of network information, this article aims to present some theoretical discussions regarding the philosophical premises and relevant principles of the ethics of network information. To begin with, as we have seen, the world of network information is different than the actual social world. As a multiple world of human life, the Philosophical Reflection on the Ethics of Network Information 251 world of network information has another important trait: it is anonymous. Any human participant on the Net is engaged in direct human-computer communication, and communicates with others merely by means of computers. Every participant may enter the giant Net world invisibly with an anonymous identity when taking part in the fictitious world of network activities. In the sense of entering the Net world invisibly, all of us are partaking in a masque which, of course, differs from the actual one on the final emergence – participants in an actual masque will show their true appearance at the end, whereas the anonyms are hard to trace with regard to their true identity. In Republic, Plato tells a story of Gyges, the ancestor of the Lydians, as follows: According to the tradition, Gyges was a shepherd in the service of the King of Lydia. One day there was a great storm, and an earthquake made an opening where he was feeding his flock. Amazed at the sight, he descended into the opening, where, among other marvels, he beheld a hollow brazen horse, having doors, in which he, stooping and looking in, saw a dead body of stature, as appeared to him, more than human and having nothing on but a gold ring. He took the ring from the finger of the dead man and re-ascended. Now the shepherds met together, as they did every month, to send the king of state an accounting of his flocks, Gyges came wearing the ring, As he was sitting among them he chanced to turn the cullet of the ring inside his hand, and instantly, he became invisible to the rest of company, and they began to speak of him as if he were no longer present. He was astonished at this, and again touching the ring he turned the cullet outward and reappeared; he made several trials of the ring, and always with the same result – when he turned the cullet he became invisible, and when it faced outward, he reappeared. He contrived to be chosen one of the messengers who were sent to the court. As soon as he arrived, he seduced the Queen, and with her help conspired against the king, slew him and took the kingdom.1 Plato says, \"Now suppose there were two such magic rings, and one were given to the just man, the other to the unjust. No one, it is commonly believed, would have such iron strength of mind as to stand fast in doing right or keep his hands off other men's goods, when he could go to the market-place and fearlessly help himself to anything he wanted, enter houses and sleep with any woman he chose, set prisoners free and kill men at his pleasure, and in a word go about men with the power of a god. He would behave no better than the other; both would take the same course.\" 2 Here Plato means that if a man could do anything evil as he will without being punished, he would do every unjust thing for the sake of his self-interest. Isn't the invisibility on the Net the same as the ring of Gyges? 1 Plato, The Republic, 359D-360D, Loeb Classical Library (Oxford: Jowett & Campbell, 1914). 2 Ibid., 360D. 252 Gong Qun The coming of the era of network information contributes to the development of human society in a process of three stages: rural society, urban society, and network information society. In an ethical sense, the arrival of the society of network information can be considered a change of great significance in that it has changed traits of human social activities. The rural society is one of acquaintances, and urban society has strangers, but network information society has anonyms. Such kind of social evolution can be seen as increasingly omitting the identity of behaviors. The consequence of this sort of de-identification is of great significance to human morals. The morality of the society of acquaintances is the morality of a society of people who are face to face. In such a society, people behave in the mutually familiar horizon of acquaintances, and acquaintance brings a kind of restrictive mechanism of morality. The idea that acquaintance acts as a morally protecting mechanism lies in the fact that among acquaintances there are relatively steady social relations and social liaisons, which form the social background for actions amid acquaintances. In addition, after long-term cooperation or communication among acquaintances, certain relatively stable emotional relations are easily produced, and these are a prerequisite for their moral acts. Even so, the rural society of acquaintances has changed with the coming of urbanization in this modern time. When people come to the city from countryside, what they see in the street are strange faces in lieu of familiar ones. The crime ratio in cities is higher than that in the countryside primarily because among strangers, there is no background restrictive mechanism whatsoever except for the law and one's own conscience. This being the case, however, the stranger is still an actual existent in urban society compared with the society of network information. The stranger becomes a symbol, one source of information. Man as an actual existent has disappeared somewhere outside the computer. When people conceal their real identity, the restriction of law and conscience may not exist, as in the case of the hero in Plato's story. The significant change of the identity of the doer is the ontological premise of our ethical reflection on network information. We can see, however, that the source of any informational symbol in the world of network information can be traced back to a human behavioral subject. The severity of human criminal phenomena rises along with the increase of the extent of the lack of human contact, and this has revealed the seamy side of human nature. To study the ethics of network information, the basic evil in human nature must be put under the microscope instead of being ignored. As in the traditions from Sophists to Hobbes in Western ethical thoughts, we may as well call such a person 'natural man,' a wolf entering the masque without being in sheep's clothing. He is also a selfish man, as was mentioned by us, merely seeking his self-interest. On the other hand, it should be seen that the individual who takes part in the Net society and lives in the world of network information is always in quest of some interest or hope, just or unjust. What we would like to ask now is: can such a selfish man always gain his purpose from the Net? He may make it once Philosophical Reflection on the Ethics of Network Information 253 or twice, but never more. Be that as it may, he still can accomplish his purpose in that others believe that he is a good man or a benign one, so they trust him too readily, leading to the fulfillment of his Net fraud. If all people practiced deception on the Net like him, there would be no one trusting anyone else. In this case, the credibility of this world of network information would cease to exist. It's like the case of a world in which every one is telling a lie. Language's function of conveying real information would disappear when nobody was telling the truth. If, furthermore, such a basic function disappeared, people could never use language; some other communicating tools would have to be developed instead. In the same vein, if the information we can get from the terminal of the Net were false, nothing but misfortune would be brought about as the result of Net communication, and the consequence would be people abandoning the Net platform. This was the case of some web sites: since only false information was released there, and they disappeared from the Net. No one trusted them. Let us presume that someone who would like to achieve his goal for interest via network information hopes to obtain his maximum interest in this way. What we'd like to ask is this: can he maximize his interest without any legal or moral restriction? Insofar as this point is concerned, due to the nature of the world of network information, law and morality are not enough. Corresponding system construction of the society of network information is a must. One suggestion is to build the system of identity via real name, logging online by means of real name, so that any one who releases information will feel that he/she is under some invisible supervision. Nevertheless, even if such a system can be built, it's hard to guarantee that all the websites of the country can live up to it, nor can it be insured that the participants in the world of network information are using their real identity. This is because you cannot assure that the operator sitting before the computer is the very person who has registered with his identity. What is more, we can only carry out such kind of program in some country with a strong supervising mechanism. We can never achieve the system of real-name identity all over the globe. The Net is borderless, and it is an information community shared by the whole planet. It has become a common phenomenon in the society of network information that the hackers of one country attack the Network of another. In this regard, this sort of system itself is, undoubtedly, defective. We need, nevertheless, some kind of reasonable restrictive mechanism. Without any constraint mechanism, all those presumed men seeking for maximum self-interest are just like the natural men in their natural states mentioned by Hobbes. In such an anonymous space, every one is free and equal, and no one will ever balk at hurting others for the maximization of his self-interest. Even Hobbes, however, realized that such a natural state could not last permanently, because the state of war between men caused thereby would deprive all the people of safety and happiness. Therefore, the pursuit of maximization of self-interest without restriction will result in the pursuer's 254 Gong Qun damage and even destruction. Hobbes contends that human reason is capable of instructing people out of the natural state; that is, people will realize that in regard to self-interest, peace and harmony are far superior to mutual hurt. Be that as it may, considering the selfishness of human nature and the nature of the society of network information, we need to construct the ethics of information on the basis of Contractarianism. To put it in another way, Contractarianism is the philosophical premise of the ethics of information.3 III. Contractarianism is a kind of contract theory represented by Hobbes and Gauthier. This sort of contract theory stresses that everyone is entitled to seek their self-interest. But pursuing self-interest should take morality as the premise. It has been seen by Contractarianism that without the protection of a moral code, people's pursuit of self-interest would be in vain, and would even become an activity of self-destruction. Consequently, everyone's pursuit of self-interest should be restricted by a moral code. It has also been seen that man's pursuit of self-interest is a kind of social behavior within interpersonal relations rather than being individual and irrelevant to others. With regard to the image of the prisoner's dilemma, Contractarianism clearly shows what the consequence would be if the seeker for self-interest went outside moral restrictions. The setup of the prisoner's dilemma has highlighted the issue of interactions between self-interested men. Suppose that A and B prepare to co-commit an offense with guns, but are detected and arrested by the police, who suspect that they have committed more severe crimes but need to get sufficient evidence. The two suspects are interrogated separately. Each of them is told that if he confesses, the punishment may be elevated; if he refuses to confess whereas the other one confesses, the punishment will be increased; if both of them confess, they both will be severely punished, but to an extent a little lighter than the former condition. Due to respective interrogation, neither of them knows whether the other one will protect him and keep silent, or cooperate with the police and give him up. The prisoner's dilemma may lead to the following four choices as the consequence: First, if A refuses to confess but B confesses, B goes free and A will receive a 10-year sentence for his refusing to cooperate with the police. Second, as above, if A confesses but B refuses to do so, the police will set A free and B will receive the 10-year penalty. Third, if both confess, they will receive a 5-year sentence respectively. 3[英]霍布斯:《利维坦》,第十四章,97-108页,商务印书馆, 1985年版。Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, Molesworth edition (1839), XIV. Philosophical Reflection on the Ethics of Network Information 255 Fourth, if neither of the two confesses, the police can only sentence them to 1 year penalty for lack of sufficient evidence. The police tell the consequences to A and B, neither of whom know what choice the other one will make, being incapable of communicating. Let's assume again, if two of them intend to get the best interest, their penalty will only be slightly lighter than the heavy one. Only when neither of them confesses, can they receive the lightest punishment. Neither however knows whether the other one will testify for the prosecution against him for the freedom of being acquitted. In consequence, both of them will risk the severest penalty when making decisions. To cooperate with the police for acquittal is, undoubtedly, reasonable to both of them, this sort of rational pursuit nevertheless will lead to worse consequence than refusing to cooperate with the police. What choice would you make if, under such circumstances, A or B were you? The assumption here is that each of the two suspects is selfish by nature, and will choose to confess for his own best interest albeit the result is a 5-year sentence. Nevertheless, if one of them is very selfish, the other being more in favor of maintaining their common interest, chances are that the selfish one gets the benefit whereas the sacrificing one ends up in the worst possible position. The prisoners' dilemma is a dilemma just because the act most reasonable to the individual might turn out to be his worst choice. The setup of the prisoners' dilemma is, without doubt, an experiment about man's thought process which also portrays the act in actual social life. The paradox of this experiment is: the most reasonable individual act of seeking for self-interest usually leads to the collectively unreasonable, as in the tragedies of common land and open sea, etc. The socalled tragedy of common land is of such reference that every shepherd in the common land is of the reason of self-interest, and hopes that he can breed more livestock, never thinking of breeding less than others. As the result, the limited common land is over-consumed so that none of the shepherds can graze their livestock. That which is reproduced by the prisoners' dilemma is the natural state by Hobbes wherein every one seeks for the maximization of his self-interest, only resulting in a tragic human condition. The prisoners' dilemma tells us that an individual's act of seeking self-interest is not unrelated to others, nor is it isolated, but it is carried on in a sort of mutual influence, and is interactive or collective. That which is turned out by the unlimited individual pursuit of self-interest is a sort of holistic influence, in that none, including the agent, can achieve the maximization of his self-interest, and even might be harmed. The escape of the prisoners' dilemma lies in the following: first, seen from the individual pursuit of self-interest, all of us should cease seeking for the maximum self-interest in favor of restrictive pursuit. Second, we should choose to seek for self-interest within restriction for the sake of others' existence and interests. This kind of pursuit is thus choosing to cooperate with others, resulting in the self-interest being bigger and better 256 Gong Qun than what might be obtained by refusing to cooperate with others in hopes of seeking maximum self-interest. This is the so-called \"cooperation surplus.\"4 The interest obtained by each individual via cooperating with others is by far bigger than that gained without cooperation. The man of self-interest in the prisoners' dilemma resembles the one in the society of network information. If people maximize their self-interest, knowing no bounds, mutual hurt will be the only result; on the other hand, if people show respect for and cooperate with others, what they will gain is bigger than if they refuse to cooperate. The appearance of the world of network information puts forward the issue of collective acts by people, telling us that if we maximize our self-interest without limitation, regardless of others' interests and needs, chances are we will fail to effectively achieve our selfish goals, and everyone's life will get worse and worse, leading to the failure of network information to exert the expected value and effect. The prisoners' dilemma tells us that holistically seen, cooperation will produce a better result than non-cooperation. How, then, can people better cooperate with each other or follow the contract? The answer is the necessary restriction from reason that makes people follow rules. However, even when most people follow the cooperative protocol, being moral citizens in the society of network information, there are still a few who refuse to do so; instead, they take advantage of others' following the protocol. How, then, should we deal with this problem? According to the contract theory of Hobbes and Gauthier, such people are fools. Gauthier argues that \"the Fool\" has made double mistakes. In the first place, intending to make use of another's contract so as to reach his own benefit, he nevertheless fails to understand that moral practices like keeping one's promise and telling the truth can really only be carried out among those who are inclined to follow them. If you only follow the contract where you can benefit, while refusing to follow it when your own benefit is tied into the benefits of others, the opportunity of reciprocity will not be left to you when it is known to others. Worse still, people will refuse to cooperate with you for your breaking your word. Gauthier suggests that people take the following instance into account: the farms of Jones and Smith are adjoining. Although they are not enemies, they are not friends either; thus neither will benefit from the other's help. They both have realized, nevertheless, that if they help one another on harvesting crops, both of them will benefit. As is known to us, the harvest needs to race against time. Jones will be ready to harvest next week and Smith will be ready two weeks later. After the period of harvest, Jones will retire, sell the farm, and move to Florida where will be impossible for him to see members in this community. Jones has promised Smith that if the latter helps him, he will return the favor next week. Both of them, however, know that to Jones, helping Smith two weeks later is purely paying lip 4 David Gauthier, \"Morality and Advantage\", Philosophical Reviews, vol. 76, 1976. Philosophical Reflection on the Ethics of Network Information 257 service; even if Smith has been offered help, he will not receive that help because Jones will be gone. On this ground, since Smith understands Jones's character orientation, he knows that even if he helped Jones, the latter would not help him when necessary. As the result, Smith will not offer help to Jones even when Jones promises to help him as the reward. By means of this example, Gauthier intends to let people understand that if they cannot set up a sort of credit relationship, the long-term credit and cooperation surplus brought by mutual trust will not be achieved in interpersonal communication. The second mistake is the succession of the previous one. Those who are really inclined to strictly follow moral practice rather than merely seek for self-interest can benefit more than those without such inclination in that the pursuers of maximum self-interest within restrictions will be the most welcome partners in reciprocal cooperation whence every one relies on the other's voluntary compliance, whereas the pursuers of unlimited maximum self-interest will be excluded.5 That contract theory is taken as the basis of the ethics of network information consists in our assumption that all the participants in the world of network information are of identical purpose of self-interest when partaking of the activities and construction of this world. Like Plato, we imagine that people gather together with an expectation of maximizing their self-interests. Mutual hurt, however, makes people reason that only when we seek for self-interest within restriction can we achieve the coexistence and win-win situation in the world of network information we have created. Nevertheless, the prerequisite of this assumption is that human nature is completely self-interest-oriented in lieu of other-interest-oriented, although we never doubt that there are people who care for others and even sacrifice themselves for others. Those caring people must have the capacity for better realizing self-restraint. But our ethical theories should not be set on the foundation that everyone is of such a high moral stature. Our only expectation of human nature is that many or most people can set up a reasonable conception as to self-good during the process of interpersonal communication and games. We do not even expect that they will have this quality in the beginning, nor that they have the idea of justice by nature, as was expected by Rawls. As long as people have a reasonable conception of self-good, we may construct a better world of information than that composed of people seeking for self-interest knowing no bounds. The construction of network ethics on the basis of restrictive pursuit of self-interest begins with a social contract among Netizens. This world of network information is made to appear thanks to the participation of the Netizens all over the globe, albeit with the prerequisite of the maturity of the conditions of human science and technology. Individuals and social 5 David Gauthier, \"Why Contractarianism?\", seen in Contractarianism / Contractualism, edited by Stephen Darwall (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Company, 2003), pp. 99-101. 258 Gong Qun organizations need network information because of the interest it brings to people's lives and work. People join in this world of network information to share this interest, and every participant is a member of it, acting in it as a symbol. In this sense, all the statuses and positions in the actual world lose their value and significance, replaced by figures and symbols. Every participant is thus a citizen of freedom as well as equality. On this premise, we present that the basic principle of the ethics of network information is the right to seek one's self-interest freely and equally, as is stipulated in the first principle of equality and justice by Rawls.6 In the world of network information, the pursuit of self-interest by each individual is compatible with the system of the freedom of the whole, and with the interest of social security. The equality and freedom of each one takes the other's freedom, as well as the supreme good of mankind, as the main limitation – thus, individual freedom is restricted only for the sake of universal freedom and the goal of good, and individual rights must be compatible with the rights of others, restricted only by that and by the interest of social security. What needs to be interpreted here is this: unlike in actual society, in the society of network information, it is inadequate to merely stress the pursuit of interest on the premise of individual equality and freedom being compatible with other's freedom. This is because the safety of network information is an issue of fundamental interest to any actual country or society. The security of websites of national defense and military affairs, national financial and banking systems, etc., is an important part of national as well as social security. In the modern world, this has also constituted a no less important part of human good. The contract amid citizens of the society of network information cannot guarantee that there is no ticket evader whatsoever, so it is inadequate to have ethical and moral norms only with respect to the construction of the society of network information. The protection of the law must form an order of law and ethics. As the result of seeking for selfinterest but knowing no bounds, the Netizens will not get the protection of law and morals and hence will become the very victims of it. Netizens seeking for unjust interests in the world of the network must receive corresponding punishment , because without this justice, the order of the Net world will be hard to maintain. The world of network information is a world without boundaries and Netizens are real citizens of the globe. The happiness of all the citizens of the Net society all around the globe is the ultimate aim of the existence and development of the world of network information. This ultimate aim calls for the healthy and active participation of all the citizens in the society of network information and the joint constructing of the governments of every country. The world of network information is the product of the development of modernized science and technology and, simultaneously, the product of man's pursuit of a better, 6 John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Harvard University Press, 1971). Philosophical Reflection on the Ethics of Network Information 259 more perfect life. We believe that man has the wisdom as well as moral ability to build the society of network information into a perfect one. School of Philosophy Renmin University of China Beijing, Republic of China gongqun2001@yahoo.com\n\nCHAPTER XX THE DISUNITY OF ANTHROPOLOGY: REFLECTIONS FROM A PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE PERSPECTIVE1 RICHARD DAVID-RUS Abstract: Inspired by the recent debate between anthropologists that place anthropology among humanities and the more scientifically oriented ones, I address the issue of the unity of the discipline, for the topic of the unity of the sciences was a major one in the classical neopositivist conception of science. After presenting the traditional view and assessing its inadequacy for the question of unity in anthropological fields, I will explore some recent modalities of approaching the issue. Local integration will be considered as a plausible form and ways to articulate it will be discussed. The role of models and modeling processes will also be emphasized as a frame to implement a pertinent approach to local integration. Keywords: unity of sciences, anthropology, types of integration, models The proximal motivation for this paper was given by the recent debate among anthropologists triggered by the redefinition of the long term objective of the American Association of Anthropologists. While the old status stated as a long term objective \"to advance anthropology as the science that studies humankind in all its aspects,\" a recent restatement says the association seeks \"to advance public understanding of humankind in all its aspects.\" This change triggered a series of reactions from the anthropologists involved in scientific areas of the discipline and reactivated deeper splits existing in the scientific community. A recent issue of the journal Nature published a commentary by A. Kuper and J. Marks (2011) on this situation, taking a stance on the media announcement of the crisis of anthropology, and trying to identify the real reason for the debate. By going beyond the parties' positions and the anti-science conspiracy accusations around which much of the debate dwelled, the authors claimed from the beginning that \"the real shocker\" emerging from the debate is the fact that \"anthropologists cannot agree on what the discipline is about.\" 1 Acknowledgement: This paper was written within The Knowledge Based Society Project supported by the Sectorial Operational Program Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), Financed by the European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract POSDRU/89/1.5/S/56815. 262 Richard David-Rus One can define anthropology in general as an umbrella type of discipline that comprises subdisciplines from the different registers of both the natural and the social/human sciences. As Kuper and Marks (2011) also emphasize, the main subdisciplines from the distinct registers have in general ignored each other during the history of the discipline. The 1980s were set apart by being characterized by a radicalization and an open conflict between the different orientations. This radicalization was driven especially by developments within the frameworks of two movements: sociobiology and cultural theory, which polarized the reductionist attitudes by placing the ultimate study of human behavior either in the biological realm or in the realm of humanities. The consequence of this radicalization was centrifugal movement of the constitutive disciplines of anthropology toward the domains that legitimize their identity. Leaving aside the radical approaches from different particular tendencies, the need for a comprehensive investigation from different perspectives of human phenomenon made interdisciplinarity a premier concern at the educational and administrative level in academic life and research. Despite this, as the two mentioned authors also emphasize, anthropologists seldom collaborate on research projects that breach their disciplinary specialties. Nevertheless, the real worry the authors address is the fact that one cannot find any major preoccupation in actual anthropology for understanding human nature as a whole, nor for understanding the connections between its biological, social, and cultural forms. Their conclusion points to an acute need for a truly comparative science of human beings and their history all over the world. *** The above conclusion and the situation discussed raise the issue of the relationship between the biological and social approaches to human nature, and, implicitly, the issue of the unity of anthropological enterprises. The aim of this paper is to address these issues from the perspective of philosophy and methodology of science. I will address therefore the problem of how the quest for the unity of anthropological fields can be posed nowadays. I'll also discuss the means through which the integration of the different approaches is explored and how it emerges in actual scientific practice. Following this path, I'll discuss my support of a position that appears to be pertinent in the actual context of research, and I will argue for understanding the important role a modelistic frame would have in such an investigation. Now, regarding the epistemological and methodological reflection on anthropological research, one might say that the philosophy of science was, in general, guided and dominated (not unjustifiably) by the reference to fundamental sciences, especially fundamental physics. Anthropology was completely ignored as a reference science and the potential philosophical subjects relevant to anthropological investigation made their way into topics from the philosophies of the social or biological sciences. One might The Disunity of Anthropology: A Philosophy of Science Perspective 263 suggest that the situation is a consequence of the multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary character of the field. Another reason for its neglect might be found in the fact that philosophers placed anthropology more in the camp of social sciences or even in the humanities register, and in the frame of these disciplines it was seen as a discipline of secondary interest. Whatever the reasons for its neglect, it does not seem to be justifiable to place anthropology into the context of actual preoccupations in philosophy of science. The dismissal of the classical concept of science that promoted a unified view built through reductive relations between scientific disciplines opened the possibility of adopting a more flexible view that makes room for a variety of scientific modalities that engage various relations beside reductive ones. Taking this context into consideration, we can say that anthropology, due to its inherent multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary nature, represents a very interesting case, insufficiently explored and rich in consequences. THE CLASSICAL PHILOSOPHICAL VIEW ON UNITY OF THE SCIENCES From the point of view of the philosophy of science, the relevant preoccupation in our discussion is regarding the topic of unity of the sciences and the relations between the different scientific disciplines. The subject of the unity of the sciences was one of the major entries on the working agenda of the neopositivistic concept of science in general. It is linked to the names of such prominent adherents of this orientation as O. Neurath and R. Carnap, who were behind the project of an encyclopedia of the unified sciences. The two authors held two different views on how this unity should be conceived. The Carnap variant is a stronger reductive model – the pyramidal model. It is characterized by logical constructions from basic concepts and reductive connections between the concepts from different levels. The laws from different sciences are connected and reduced to the genuine fundamental laws of physics. Carnap's approach stresses a conceptual precision, deductive systematization, and logical rigor. The other variant, promoted by Neurath, is less reductive. His model adopts the image of the encyclopedia as a metaphor for the way he sees the unity of the sciences. Instead of a single rigorous language, he acknowledges the existence in science of imprecise terms from ordinary language. He rejects a strong physicalistic reductionism and makes room for the \"soft sciences,\" such as the social and human sciences. His unity of the sciences is meant to promote conversations and interactions across existing domains through local exchanges and cross-fertilizations. Taking into account the recent directions of research in the philosophy of science, Neurath's view proves to be relevant for the actual existing research agenda. It also proves to be relevant for our discussion, as will become clear later in my paper. 264 Richard David-Rus In the postwar neopositivistic landscape, we can identify two major moments that reflect the subject of the unity of the sciences. The first one is related to Hempel's model of scientific explanation – a general model that is meant to be a universal model of scientific explanation valid for any scientific field. The second moment is related to the classical model of inter-theoretical reduction developed by E. Nagel in his influential book The Structure of Science (1979). I'll first briefly discuss the two models starting with the second, since it bears directly on the relationships between different scientific disciplines. According to Nagel's account, the reduction relation between two theories, T1 and T2, implies two fundamental requirements. The first requirement refers to the connectivity of the terms belonging to the two different theories and reflects the need for the continuity of the meaning of the theoretical terms from T1 and T2. It is a condition for the preservation of the reference for the concepts in the two theories. The second requirement refers to the relation of derivability between the laws of the two theories. The laws of the reducible theory are to be derived from the laws of the basic theory from which the reduction is done. The first condition proved to be problematic and generated numerous counterarguments. One of the strongest challenges makes reference to the multiple realizing of the predicates of the reducible sciences. In the classical example of the reduction of psychology to neurobiology, a predicate such as pain specific to a psychological theory can be realized by multiple neuronal states in the brain. The argument from multirealizing inhibits the possibility of a biunivocal relationship between the semantics of the two involved theories. Meanwhile, the second condition is also problematic. A strict deductive relationship between the laws of the two theories, such as Nagel proposes, is of too restrictive a nature. As many examples from science show, including the classical reduction of thermodynamics to statistical mechanics, there are many additional assumptions that are involved in the process of getting the laws of the reducible theory from the main one. Regarding the other important model of unity, Hempel's model of scientific explanation is a general unifying schema intended to account for all scientific explanations, each one independent of the particular scientific domain in which it was developed. It construes the explanation as a deductive (or inductive, in the case of statistical explanation) inference forming laws and boundary conditions. The subsequent critique showed its limitation when applied in social and historical disciplines. The schema discloses its limitations also through the fact that it bans any influence of pragmatic factors in the explanatory processes. The reactions against the two models intensified with the critique of the neopositivistic conception of science. Even after the dismissal of the \"received view\" of science, the models marked the working agenda of the two topics of scientific explanation and theoretical reduction in subsequent debates. The Disunity of Anthropology: A Philosophy of Science Perspective 265 The reactions against Nagel's model took various forms, covering a large spectrum of antireductionism. A radical sort of antireductionism could be found in the well-known works of Thomas Kuhn (1996) and Paul Feyerabend (1975). The consequences of their type of position bring about an isolationism and an extreme form of relativism between scientific theories. The main drawback of such an isolationism is the fact that it cannot account for the interactions and the fertile exchanges that exist between the different scientific theories. More moderate forms of reductionism were also advanced in different variants2 but they were disputed in their generality and ran into insoluble difficulties.3 The preoccupation with the topic of unity in the last decades of the twentieth century diversified and took particular forms. Once the received view of science was dismissed, the centrality of units as laws or theories was challenged, along with their exclusive roles in approaching the unity of the sciences. Alternative units and modes of knowledge were taken into more serious consideration for the unity issue. The inquiry became also more focused on specific fields of science. Taking into account the limitation of the reductionist program in the study of unity, the possibility of non-reductive sorts of unification caught the attention of the philosophers. CHARACTERISTICS OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL RESEARCH The inadequacies of a pure reductive relationship among the subdisciplines of anthropology and of the radical antireductionist view could be easily seen in the case of the anthropological disciplines. As anthropological research spans a wide spectrum of explanatory registers, from the molecular level of biochemical and biological research up to the social investigation of institutions and cultures, we would need a stronger version of unity by reduction. The reductionist view on such a large scale would have affinities with the initial neopositivist intention of the grand unification. It certainly does not make sense to put the unity question into these terms anymore. Reductionism is implausible on a global scale, but it might be quite workable on a smaller one. Reductive relationships might appear and operate in limited areas between different, more restricted domains of research. In more particular cases of anthropological research, for example, one might encounter reductive explanations that will try to biologically explain certain social behaviors. The issue of reduction has to be tackled in this particular setting with an eye to the specific context of scientific inquiry in which the claim takes place. 2 A widely discussed one uses the concept of supervenience adapted from philosophy of mind. 3 For a updated review see Jordi Cat's article in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 266 Richard David-Rus Anthropology clearly forces a pluralistic view upon us. In a time when the influence of neopositivism was still great, there were authors who recognized the plurality of the explanatory forms in anthropological research. S.T. Goh (1971) offers us such an analysis. He identifies and compares three different positions regarding explanation in anthropology. The first one places in a Hempelian frame, regarding anthropology as a homothetic science. Such anthropologists as Radcliffe-Brown and Marvin Harris saw the aim of anthropology in discovering scientific laws. The second one takes into account the historicist reaction to the DN model and sees anthropology as mainly dealing with particular sorts of statements, without aiming at discovering general laws. According to this view, \"Anthropology is history, simply because as a matter of brute fact, anthropologists are interested in historical-idiographic problems.\"(Goh 1971, 342) The works of many classical anthropologists including Boas, Lowie, Radin, Kroeber, and Evans-Pritchard are oriented to particular analyses and descriptions. The third orientation draws on the ideas of the philosopher P. Winch, for whom the understanding of the social sciences is different from the one of the natural sciences. The task of the anthropologist is to make sense of the behavior of individuals by contextualizing the behavior within the frame of the purposes, motives, beliefs, and norms of behavior of that people. For Goh, none of the above approaches exhaust the multiplicity of anthropological explanatory forms. Anthropology is both science and history, and we can find endeavors belonging to both types of inquiry. The explanatory practice reveals that anthropologists use a plethora of explanations and Goh suggests, therefore, that the best way to account for explanation in anthropology is a methodological eclectism. Due to the complexity of the biological and social systems investigated, anthropological research engages a large variety of scientific representations. Different representations capture some aspects of the systems from specific perspectives under various theoretical settings. As Mitchell (1997, 2003) also emphasized (and I'll discuss her ideas in a further section), it is improbable that these representations enter into the relationships of derivability and translatability that the classical reductive view requires. They constitute rather different descriptions from distinct registers of investigations that could be best integrating on a local scale. GLOBAL VERSUS LOCAL APPROACHES The traditional approaches to the unity of the sciences can be characterized as being of a global sort. They look at unification on the large scale, involving theories of whole scientific fields or scientific disciplines. This is in a straight sense the legacy of the neopositivistic view on science, trying to describe and subsume in one universal language (using formal means) the variety of scientific forms belonging to different disciplines. The The Disunity of Anthropology: A Philosophy of Science Perspective 267 goal was to make explicit a single valid methodology of scientific thinking and a unique valid structure of science. Despite the rejection of the neopositivistic conception of science, due mainly to the historical critique from the 1960s, the influence of the older agenda can be identified in the subsequent period. We can see it in the topic of scientific explanation that was driven by the general search for types of explanations in all disciplines even after the dismissal of Hempel's model. Such are the important accounts proposed by Friedman (1974) or Kitcher (1989) – defining the unificationist approach as well as Salmon's causalist approach (1998). It can be detected also in the projects that sought to provide a general analysis of the structure of science that could account for any sort of scientific theory. Such is the semantic conception of theories that rejected the neopositivist syntactic view, or the \"received view,\" and intended to provide a more adequate analysis of the nature of scientific theories. Starting with the last two decades of the twentieth century, one can detect a move toward a different way of philosophical investigation. Nick Huggett (2000) described this tendency as \"localism\" with reference to the positions articulated in the realism-antirealism debate. The articulation of local philosophies that characterize it indicates that the way problems are raised and solved involves the recourse to specific scientific programs using local resources and elements in the frame of these programs. It rejects the appeal to prior determined views on science and scientific knowledge that should determine and guide philosophical inquiry. Localism is also linked to the rise of a more radical position in regard to the issue of the unity of the sciences – the one arguing for the disunity of the sciences. In this sense, Jan Hacking argues for the disunity of the sciences in terms of local unities. (Hacking 1996) The local sort of unity becomes a more plausible and workable solution than the global and more formal accounts of unity. The local tendency in philosophical research intensified in the last decade and stimulated new insights into older problems. Such an expression can be found in the philosophical research that reconsidered scientific models and modeling practices as important elements in the production of scientific knowledge. In another text (David-Rus 2009, 2011) dealing with this topic, I was arguing for a local type of solution that I saw as a plausible one, taking into account actual philosophical tendencies. In the same text, I argued for a specific setting that provides consistency to such a local approach. This was a modelistic setting, in which models are taken as reference units, as bearers of explanatory processes. As I suggested above, a local perspective on unity is a plausible one under which a fruitful investigation could be engaged. In a following section, I will also take into consideration a modeling frame, and the ways the unity problem can be addressed within such a frame. 268 Richard David-Rus FORMS OF PLURALISM Localism brings with it a pluralistic perspective on unity. Pluralism can be of many forms and shapes involving different registers: metaphysical, ontological, epistemic, methodological, etc. I will be especially concerned with the one involving explanations. First, a distinction has to be introduced into the discussion.4 It is one between the plurality and pluralism. The first one is a characteristic of the state of scientific inquiry in the sciences today. The second is the view about this state when considering whether it is or is not eliminable from the very nature of scientific knowledge. The antireductionist reaction already prepares the way for a pluralistic view. The most usual form of this is the one we encounter relative to theoretical frames and conceptual schema. Nevertheless, in its most radical form we saw it lead to the unproductive form of isolationism. One widely spread form of the pluralistic view is the \"levels of organization\" schema. According to it, the world is stratified on different registers (that we might regard from an ontological or an epistemological angle) starting with the microlevel entities up to the macrolevel ones. So in the biological realm we have at the bottom the particle's level on which the next level, the one of molecules, builds. The level of cells is the next one and organism and populations are the higher ones. We find research at these levels in the disciplines of biochemistry and molecular biology. If we are to regard social phenomena, we can start with the levels of individuals or we can go lower to the psychological states level and could build up to the social institutions and whole societies' or cultures' levels. One straight type of pluralism can be conceived of as a competitive one, implying a competition between different explanatory descriptions and then the elimination of the less useful explanation. But this does not represent in an adequate way the scientific practice. As other authors also emphasized,5 there is no certainty that the best explanation at a given moment will remain the best in the future. So alternative explanations are not all dismissed and eliminated; on the contrary, it is reasonable to develop such alternatives if they are to have a chance to succeed in the future. So some of the explanations and models are in direct competition, but there are also others that are not actually mutually exclusive, showing a sort of compatibility. We encounter here another kind of pluralism, a compatible sort of pluralism. Under this view, different explanations coexist in a area of research without any pretence of an integration. According to one view, the different strata from the organizational schema are also levels of different analysis that are pretty much autonomous. We might see in this way distinct registers of explanations that 4 Introduced also in the volume Scientific Pluralism edited by Kellert et al. 5 For example, Kitcher, 1991. The Disunity of Anthropology: A Philosophy of Science Perspective 269 do not intersect. Hypotheses can compete only within specific levels and not inter-level. Sherman (1988) develops such a view reviving the classical classification proposed by Tinbergen (1963) on different types of questions. But this proved to be wrong. Sandra Mitchell (2002) challenged Sherman's account and showed that his view fails to capture adequately the relationships between alternative explanations. She shows that solutions to questions at one level (e.g. developmental) influence and have impact on the possible solutions on another level (e.g. evolutionary). The other point is that competitions that occur at different levels do not necessary imply mutually exclusive alternatives. We often do see intralevel competition among hypotheses that do not exclude each other. A pertinent option is given by the sort of integrative pluralism promoted by Mitchell (1997, 2002, and 2003). Such a view admits the coexistence of different areas of investigation, as in compatible pluralism, but makes a point of emphasizing also an integrative tendency of investigation. In order to explain her position, we have to make reference to the way phenomena are represented in different modalities. Though Mitchell seems to reduce explanation to the causal sort and to take causal mechanisms as the goal of our representation, her position can be claimed with more generality to include other types of explanatory forms, such as the functional ones that are so common in biological disciplines. The main point hinges on the fact that our representations are capturing only some features of the complex phenomena under investigation. The representations deployed in science are the products of simplification, idealization, and approximation, which makes them apt to describe and treat the features of interest. The complex biological or social phenomena are partially described in such representation. In fact, a system can be seen from different views, such as an individual human being as a biological system can be at the same time \"a host to a parasite, a consumer in a ecosystem, a phenotypic expression of a set of genotypes, a mammalian organism\" (Mitchell 2003, 182), etc. Of course, the social register will multiply these representations. These target different causal registers that could be seen as complementary and partially overlapping. LOCAL INTEGRATION, MODELS, AND EXPLANATIONS The integration backed by Mitchell is one involving models that target such different causal mechanisms. The integration is of a local sort that implies local unification in contradistinction to the global sort, as advocated by Friedman and Kitcher. The local theoretically unifies some of the models without making reference to a general overall unified corpus of knowledge or to any strictly reductionist relationship between representations. On the contrary, it makes evident the existence of a variety of strategies through which interdisciplinary interaction takes place. Pluralism is reflected also in the many types of integration taking place at different levels of abstraction and in different modalities. Previous 270 Richard David-Rus research already revealed such sorts of integration. Such is the work of Darden and Maull (1977), who investigated different forms of \"interfiled relations\" such as physical localization and part-whole relations, identifying a structure underlying a function, identifying a cause in one field and the effect in another field, etc. Bechtel and Richardson (2010) also investigated such integrative modalities, especially in connection to different levels of organization and the transfer of conceptual frames to new domains. Mitchell (1997) also identifies three types of integration: one involving mechanical rules that \"determine the joint effects of independent additive causal processes;\" a second concerning local theoretical unification, through which we jointly model more features of complex systems; and the third, concerning explanatory concrete integration in highly complex cases. This type makes integration specific to the situation or only to a narrow class of situations. With particular reference to the study of human nature from both biological and social perspectives, Mitchell and collaborators (1997) identify three major strategies that are at work in case of such integrations. A first strategy is characterized by the attempts to build a common language between the different scientific registers. A good example is the anthropomorphic discourse that is used in disciplines like ethology and primatology. A second strategy can be identified through the metaphoric transfer of models between the biological and the social disciplines. A good illustration is given by the populational models developed by some authors (like Boyd and Richerson) for the study of cultural evolution. A last strategy is given in the use of mathematical techniques of probabilistic and statistical inference. These techniques are used in both biological and social investigations. The second strategy suggests engaging a modeling view for approaching the issues of unification. I will further discuss in more detail some aspects related to such a perspective. *** In order to understand the modelistic view, we must recall the fact that the philosophy of science in its classical form is mainly determined by the logical empiricism, and its legacy centered on the concept of scientific theory. Many of the main topics of philosophy of science (such as confirmation, progress, etc.) are closely linked to the clarification of the nature of scientific theories. Among the different ways to react to the limitations of this view is to hold the idea that a major move is constituted by the reconsideration of the role and importance models play in scientific knowledge. As the recent trend of this type of move shows, this frame opens the possibility of a reconfiguration and restatement of old problems, and thus the possibility of overcoming the old deadlocks. We can see the contribution of models of the unity problem at different levels of scientific inquiry. Mitchell and collaborators (1997) mention them in connection to the metaphorical transfer of concepts among The Disunity of Anthropology: A Philosophy of Science Perspective 271 biological disciplines, and from them to social and cultural studies. This is a way of seeking a more general unification and less strictly local one, targeting, for example, in Boyd and Richerson (2005), populational studies on culture and the complex phenomena of culture. But besides the above strategy, Mitchell's types of integration could be put in a modeling frame, gaining in this way more consistency in the investigation. Her local theoretical unification sort of integration would, in many cases, involve building a more comprising model that integrates the more specific causal mechanism. It is a characteristic of the theoretical models to bring together submodels, mechanisms, or representations of some features of the phenomena that were described previously. By focusing on such types of models in specific scientific modeling episodes, one might identify more clearly the modalities through which the different submodels and representations are merged and pieced together. The modeling frame provides a setting that better identifies the units at work and the relations between them in the process of integration. The other type of integration that Mitchell identifies could be also illuminated in a modeling context. It is the integration through explanation of \"concrete phenomena,\" an integration that targets a highly complex system in which many factors are at work. The modeling process proposed to account for the situation would be of a very particular sort specific to the situation and to contextual factors, which would make it inadequate for applications to other systems or for the extraction of a more general algorithm. In fact, \"the actual configuration of complex processes resulting from biological and sociological causal mechanisms will be determined on a case to-case basis.\" (Mitchell et al. 1997, 124) Both types of integration discussed above, the local theoretical unification one and that of the explanation of concrete phenomena, could be addressed in a frame that represents explanation through modeling processes. In my previous work (David-Rus 2009, 2011) I argued for the plausibility of an approach that articulates the explanatory processes in the modeling processes, and I have suggested a particular schema developed by Hartmann and Frigg (2005) as a good starting point. The schema, also called the LOOP schema, involves four main processes taking in the model and the area between the model and the represented system. The first two steps are called identification steps. In the first one, we identify the occurrence in the target (OIT as they call it), that is, the behavior of interest in the target system that has to be explained. In the second identifying step, the occurrence in the model (OIM) is identified, or the element in the model that corresponds to the occurrence in the target that we wish to explain. The next two steps are called the explanatory steps. In the first one, called explanation_1, we have to reproduce the OIM in the model, meaning that the OIM has to follow from the basic assumptions of the model. 'Follow' is not made more explicit in any way but is not reducible to deduction as in the DN model. The fourth and last step, called explanation_2, involves the translation of knowledge obtained in the model 272 Richard David-Rus (and about the model) to the target system. This way, what holds true in the model approximately carries over to the real system. The LOOP schema is a general, empty schema that makes sense only if applied to particular modeling episodes. Approaching such episodes that are illustrations of the types of integration previously discussed, we can better illuminate the articulation of the integration process and its more general characteristics. FINAL REMARKS In order to draw my discussion to an end, I will wrap up the main points and morals of my discussion. Conceiving of the unity of the sciences was an important goal in the classical philosophy of science. Inspired by scientific progress at the beginning of the twentieth century, philosophers envisioned an ideal image of a hierarchical order and reductive relations that would bring together the way science explains reality through its fundamental theories. Anthropology was in a delicate position due to its particular object of study: human nature and its implications. From the unified methodological perspective, this unity could be seen as a more local problem concerning the reduction of the social sciences to the biological ones. Nevertheless, as research advanced in these domains, especially in the second half of the last century, unveiling the complexity of the systems studied and the autonomy from the physicalist sciences, it became clear that such a grand unification picture has no correspondence in reality. Philosophical research focused on more local approaches, and unveiled a plethora of interesting aspects of scientific knowledge. The disunity of the sciences became a more plausible idea to represent the actual situation. Regarding anthropological investigation, the actual situation does not imply that questions regarding human nature should no longer be asked. It is quite justified to raise them, but the obsessive seeking for a unique answer might not be justified. Instead, science offers us a patchwork of solutions from which one can choose. It makes for a rich and stimulating perspective, in my view. Romanian Academy Iaşi, Romania davidrus@gmail.co CHAPTER XXI THE CONCEPT OF DIGNITY IN THE CAPABILITY APPROACH: A PERSONALIST PERSPECTIVE ASYA MARKOVA Abstract: My intent in this paper is to develop a conceptual account of human dignity that does not exclude persons with mental disabilities. On one hand I share Martha Nussbaum's critic on the rationalistic reductionism of the dominant concept of dignity; a reductionism that consists in the grounding of human dignity in the concepts of free will, individual autonomy, and the ability to be a party to the social contract. On the other hand, however, I think that Nussbaum's conception of dignity is a tautological one. That is why I will elaborate on this concept further by referring to the approach of personalist philosophy, and especially to the very fruitful attempt of Gabriel Marcel to conceptualize dignity by first contrasting it to its opposite, which is, according to Marcel, the \"spirit of abstraction.\" On the ground of Marcel's philosophy, I argue that human dignity consists in the very basic capability to resist to one's own stigmatization and reification by others, as well as to struggle for one's own recognition as a valuable individual person. Keywords: dignity, capability, approach-foundational issues, personalism My intent in this paper is to develop an account of human dignity which can grasp and include conceptually the normative status of persons with mental disabilities. It is obvious that this account must avoid the rationalistic reductionism of the common concepts of dignity. The exclusion of persons with mental disabilities is one of the three central problems of justice, identified by Martha Nussbaum as unsolved problems of several rationalistic social contract theories. However, since the concept of dignity plays a key role as a foundational issue in the capability approach to social justice, developed by Nussbaum herself, I cannot agree with her that it is enough just to use our intuitive understandings of what human dignity means. That is why I shall first systematize the implicit and explicit uses of the concept of dignity in Nussbaum's version of the capability approach. Then I shall turn my attention to alternative perspectives on dignity, and especially to the philosophical tradition of personalism, where 'human 274 Asya Markova dignity' is a central and constant theme. In particular, I shall focus here on Gabriel Marcel's essay Human Dignity.1 Finally, on a base of the analyses of the uses of the concept in question in the personalist tradition, I shall sketch out a way to develop a new account of the concept of dignity that could serve as a philosophical foundation of Nussbaum's capability approach. RECONSTRUCTING THE CONCEPT OF DIGNITY IN THE CAPABILITY APPROACH In recent years Nussbaum developed an innovative approach to social justice that departs from the classical social contract paradigm, but remains both critical and supplemental to it. Nussbaum's starting point is the understanding that the interrelated problems of gender inequalities, poverty, and religion2 on one hand, and many of the problems of people with disabilities3 on the other, are problems of justice that cannot be adequately approached if we only understand personhood and citizenship in terms of rationality, that is, in terms of free, equal, and independent persons who get together in social cooperation for the purpose of their mutual advantage. The conditions of justice as they have been described in classical theories of social contracts are no more plausible when we take into consideration the situation of persons with physical and mental disabilities, or the situation of citizens of poor nations, whose life-chances and opportunities to practice their rights are not equal with the chances and opportunities of the citizens of wealthy countries. With regard to these situations, Nussbaum reexamines critically the interrelated questions of what could be the purpose of social cooperation and who can qualify as a citizen. Generally speaking, she questions the priority of the distributive paradigm of justice as an adequate perspective for catching and solving these questions. The capability approach is her alternative framework for the topics of justice. She claims that when one starts from the premise that many different types of dignity are worthy of respect, then the capacity to function as a party of social contracts, having the abilities that practices of mutual advantage presuppose, is not necessarily a condition of being a citizen who has dignity and who deserves to be treated with respect as an equal with regard to the plurality of his or her life-activities.4 The central philosophical claim of a capability-centered theory of justice is that there are different types of dignity. To accept this claim 1 See Gabriel Marcel, Human Dignity, The Existential Background of Human Dignity (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1963). 2 Marta Nussbaum, Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000). 3 Martha Nussbaum, Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership (Harvard University Press, 2006). 4 Ibid., p. 17. The Concept of Dignity in the Capability Approach 275 implies that rationality and language lose their status as the central characteristics of humanity. Rather, they are to be understood simply as life-activities that exist among many other expressions of humanity. According to this pluralistic notion of humanity, the purpose of justice becomes this: to secure a minimal threshold of developing various human capabilities which a life of dignity presupposes. Nussbaum's project is a normative and evaluative one, since, according to her, not every capability should be supported, but only the ones which refer to the intuitive notion of a life of dignity. She presents a list of ten basic human capabilities5 and claims that they must be pursued politically for each and every person, because they are intuitively inherent to the notion of a truly human life, or of a dignified life.6 However, it seems to me that Nussbaum's intuitive justification of the capability approach to dignity is insufficient. It is always possible that someone might not share her intuition of what dignity is. This trivial possibility is a serious argument against the attempt to justify Nussbaum's universalistic theory. Keeping in mind the status of the dignity concept as the foundational point of reference for all the central claims of Nussbaum's philosophical project, we should not neglect the lack of a systematical and exhaustible account of what human dignity precisely means. In my attempt to overcome that deficit, I will first try to explicate those aspects in the usual philosophical accounts on dignity, from which Nussbaum tries to distance her own concept. On first sight, this attempt seems not that difficult. In Nussbaum's book on the philosophical foundation of capability approach, Frontiers of Justice, there is only one short chapter on dignity, with the title \"Dignity: Aristotelian, not Kantian.\"7 Despite this title, we should be aware that at one point Nussbaum fully shares the Kantian notion of dignity: that dignity is the demand of respect for each person as an end in him/herself. For Nussbaum, like for Kant, every person deserves respect simply because he/she belongs to the human race. This common view of Kant and Nussbaum is the first analytical key to the concept of dignity. The demand to treat each person as an end in him/herself is also the leading principle of personalistic philosophy, which I will consider in the second part of my paper. Here, the notion of dignity comes close to the idea of \"things\" that have an inherent value – and not an instrumental one. This aspect of the Kantian concept of dignity supports Nussbaum's critics on the notion that mutual advantage is the only possible aim of social cooperation: for example, if we think of society only as a joint venture for mutual advantage, we would not acknowledge the dignity of persons with mental disabilities. But according to Kant, persons have their own inestimable worth in themselves – and according to Nussbaum, it is 5 Ibid., pp. 76-78. 6 Ibid., p. 78. 7 Ibid., p. 159. 276 Asya Markova not their productivity that makes persons human. However, the differences between Kant's and Nussbaum's accounts of dignity become clear when one puts to them the following question: Of what does the inherent value of persons that is not exhaustible from any price or from any utility consist? According to Kant, that inherent value consists in the free will of the reasonable man, who acts in accordance with universal moral law – and who is also an author of that law. Kant's principle of respect involved in the formulation of the categorical imperative presupposes the ability of moral judgment, which requires the capacity of abstract thinking. That implies a high level autonomy from empirical or social dependency. So the dignity of man, his inherent value, consists in the ability to ignore the imperatives of needs, desires, and habits, and to act only with accordance to the primary moral duty of reason. But what about the dignity of persons with mental disabilities? Kant would probably say that this is an empirical problem, and not a philosophical one. But it could also be a problem of the theoretical framework within which we define who is a person, and what constitutes personal dignity. At any rate, Nussbaum thinks that we face a structural problem here – and not just an empirical one.8 The Aristotelian and Marxian, that is, the non-Kantian, notion of dignity, which she defends, is based on the understanding of the human not primarily as a rational being, but as a political animal. This is an idea that Nussbaum shares with Aristotle. She states: \"It (the Capability Approach – A. M.) sees the rational as simply one aspect of the animal, and, at that, not the only one that is pertinent to a notion of truly human functioning.\"9 According to her, there are different kinds of animal dignity that deserve respect, so that with regard to humans, we should not construct an opposition between animality and rationality. The second distinction of Nussbaum from the Kantian perspective comes from Marx. This is the notion that the human is a creature \"in need of plurality of life-activities.\"10 To dignify different capabilities as having equal status to rationality is a crucial move in a theory of justice that tries to include also the particular fate of persons with mental disabilities. That move at first glance simply reminds us that there are very different reasons and ways to value human life. However, Nussbaum links this understanding of humanity only in a selective way to the concept of dignity, by discriminating between certain human activities that should be treated as sources of dignity and other activities that do not deserve such treatment. What is valuable in itself for Nussbaum is not simply the plurality of lifeactivities; rather, the list of capabilities that grounds her concept of dignity is normatively selected.11 Nussbaum asserts: \"Of course human beings have 8 Ibid., p. 127. 9 Ibid., p. 158. 10 Ibid., p. 159. 11 Ibid., p. 162. The Concept of Dignity in the Capability Approach 277 all sorts of capabilities, meaning activities from which to choose and act. The items of my list, however, are the result of an evaluative argument that asks the question: What opportunities are entailed by the idea of a life worthy of human dignity? The approach then, does not read capabilities from the factual observation of human nature as it is. Many capacities in our nature are bad (such as the capacity for cruelty) and many are too trivial to be inherent in the idea of a life worthy of human dignity. My approach, then, does not value capabilities as such, or freedom as such. Some freedoms or opportunities to act are good and some bad, some important and some trivial.\"12 I quote this long passage because it seems to me that if we cannot formulate the concept of dignity independently of the definitions of capabilities, we also cannot (except intuitively) figure out which capabilities are specifically human, which are good, which are bad, which are trivial, and which are linked to the idea of respect for each human being as an end in itself. In this central point, the definition of Nussbaum seems to be a tautological one: to live in dignity means to have the list of capabilities which a life worthy of dignity presupposes. This tautological argumentation is the main weakness of Nussbaum's conception of dignity. That is why in the following part of my paper I will turn my attention to alternative and more systematic concepts of dignity in order to provide an answer to the question of whether the fulfillment of Nussbaum's list of ten capabilities is really a necessary and sufficient condition of a life in dignity. ТHE CONCEPT OF DIGNITY FROM GABRIEL MARCEL'S PERSONALISTIC PERSPECTIVE The concept of human dignity has been investigated in its various forms and conceptual relations in the book The Еxistential Background of Human Dignity13 by the philosopher and playwright Gabriel Marcel. In this paragraph, I shall distinguish the central features of Marcel's concept of dignity as they can be found in his essay \"Human Dignity.\" What makes this text so interesting and fruitful for my aim in this paper is that the conceptualization of dignity as inherent to every person from the fact of his/her birth is here approached by first explicating the antithesis of dignity. According to Marcel, the opposite of dignity is not its absence, but the guilty conscience or the affected dignity. He also introduces a concept of so-called \"decorative dignity.\" There is a relation between these three 12 Marta Nussbaum, \"Capabilities, Entitlements, Rights: Supplementation and Critique\" in Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, vol.12, No1 (2011):23. See also: Martha Nussbaum, \"Capabilities as Fundamental Entitlements\", Feminist Economics No9, pp. 33-59. 13 Gabriel Marcel, The Existential Background of Human Dignity (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1963). 278 Asya Markova negative concepts of dignity which now I will attempt to reconstruct systematically. Affected Dignity and the Spirit of Abstraction In a first approach to the understanding of what the opposite of dignity is, Marcel refers to one of his dramatic works, Le Dard.14 Through the structure of the actions of his hero, he describes dramatically how a certain kind of personal success becomes a source of resentment, and so causes a kind of ideological conscience and pathological conduct. Marcel describes ideology by the term \"spirit of abstraction\": in the drama he quotes, the spirit of abstraction appears in the compensatory efforts of the hero to justify his life and career advances, which he won by marrying into a rich family. The bitterness and resentment in the hero come from the notion that by this marriage, he has betrayed the class to which he belonged. This notion becomes a pathological and totalitarian one, because every opinion and every judgment of the hero are inspired by his desire to remain in line with a certain class ideology. For example, as his friend states, our hero likes Beethoven not for his music, but because he ascribes to Beethoven an ideology very similar to his own. His friend also accuses the hero of often judging others not on the basis of their intrinsic qualities, but on categories under which he subsumes them. The pathological character of the guilty conscience on which the concept of the spirit of abstraction or of ideology is based becomes even more obvious by the unjust and hateful behavior of the hero to the people he actually loves. In order to elaborate analytically on the phenomenon that in the drama is signified as the \"spirit of abstraction,\" which is the opposite of human dignity, I shall highlight one crucial point: obviously, for Marcel, there is a link between the totalitarian character of the ideological conscience and the practice of depersonalization, a link that makes us unable to see and to treat human beings as human beings instead of subordinating each and every individual under abstract designations. According to Marcel, the totalitarian character of ideology has something in common with the inability to make distinctions between different kinds of rules and principles that ground different ways of dealing with different kinds of \"objects.\" This inability expresses itself in cases in which one conducts all one's own actions and judgments on the basis of a single or solitary principle, thus neglecting every kind of difference. When this neglect regards the ability to see the difference between persons and objects (in this case we can use the term \"reification\"), or between persons and ideas, this phenomenon should not be seen simply as \"wrong judgment,\" because it is also a pathological judgment. 14 Gabriel Marcel, Le Dard, pièce en trois actes (Paris: impr.-édit. Plon, 1936). The Concept of Dignity in the Capability Approach 279 It is worth noting that when Marcel considers this kind of pathological behavior by his hero in Le Dard to persons who are close to him, he asserts that the most important feature of that behavior is the lack of love.15 It seems that according to Marcel, his ideology consists basically in the lack of love, or more precisely, in the destruction of love and of sensitivity for others in their inherent and specific values by resentment and guilty conscience. The concept of love is used here in the very common sense of valuable relation to a concrete person, and the opposite of the principle of love is the practice of bad abstraction. But why should this practice also be the opposite of dignity? It is obvious that we do not feel humiliated if not everyone loves us. While we demand legitimately that everyone should respect our dignity, we could not expect that everyone should love us. Let us link this distinctive interrelation between love and dignity to the main questions of this paper, namely: 1) How can we develop a conceptual account of dignity that does not exclude persons with mental disabilities, and 2) How can we overcome the rationalistic reductionism of the dominant concepts of dignity? In light of Marcel's considerations on dignity, the second appears as nothing else but the ability to resist the ideological treatment of oneself as a \"thing,\" a treatment that stands in contradiction to the ways one learns to know and value oneself by one's relationships of love with one's significant others. If we do not lose the sense of our dignity, we intuitively resist forms of bad abstraction in our everyday practices – and we are quite sensitive to them in cases in which they oppress our own personality or the personalities of our close relatives and friends. The described practice of resistance seems to have a clear moral impact in a Kantian sense. However, unlike in Kantian thinking, the ability for abstract thinking does not play a central role here. Rather, to have the ability to resist against a false or disturbed construction of oneself depends on having a basic sense of who one is (and who one is not), as well as on one's pre-cognitional conviction that one is a valuable person. Probably, at the very basic level of that self-awareness, we should not insist that it entails a developed moral consciousness, but it does entail a sense of dignity. We should consider that even one's aggressive and destructive resistance against subordinating under abstract humiliating categorizations – for example one's labeling in racist terms, or, say, as having \"mental retardation\" – are, in fact, expressions of and attempts to keep one's own human dignity. As Marcel notes, in the constant desire of his hero not to betray the social milieu of his birth, something noble may appear as well.16 Guilty conscience is, first of all, an attempt to compensate, to correct – but it is a pathological attempt. Marcel seems to endorse the notion that the guilty conscience (or the antithesis of dignity) is, paradoxically, a perverted 15 Marcel, The Existential Background of Human Dignity, p.123. 16 Ibid., p.119. 280 Asya Markova derivation of a kind of essential dignity, which is inherent to every human being. However, in accordance with what was said here about the role of resistance in the concept of dignity, the term \"inherent\" must be clarified: instead of asserting, like Marcel, that human dignity is inherent to every human person from the very fact of his/her birth, it would be better to turn our attention to the conditions that make possible the development of selfawareness and self-esteem, as well as the ability for non-pathological forms of resistance against reification and ideological treatment. Understanding these conditions will enable us also to understand how one could, in the sense of Marcel, lose his/her real dignity and substitute pathological forms of affected or decorative dignity, forms which build themselves on the grounds of ideology. CONCLUSION The moral of the story I tried to tell here is that dignity consists basically in the ability of the person to resist attempts to subordinate him/herself to abstract and ideological categories and forms of oppression, whose basic feature is that they destroy moral thresholds that are necessary conditions for us to feel ourselves to be persons, and not mere instruments, objects, or animals. Such attempts are not only acts of humiliation, but also acts of dehumanization. To put it in the terminology of Nussbaum: the ability to resist dehumanization is the very fundamental capability that makes human life worth living and that should be ascribed to every human being who participates in relationships of love. Hence, the answer to the question of whether or not the capabilities in Nussbaum's list necessarily belong to the concept of dignity depends on the further question of whether or not these capabilities contribute to the development of the central capability to resist against one's own subordination to abstract, impersonal terms and schemes, and to affirm oneself as a person who deserves to be respected in his/her concrete features. Department of Philosophy and Sociology New Bulgarian University Sofia, Bulgaria amarkova@nbu.bg CHAPTER XXII UNDERSTANDING MENTAL HEALTH: EXISTENTIAL SITUATION AND SOCIAL ATTITUDE1 TEBEANU ANA-VOICHIŢA, MACARIE GEORGE-FLORIAN, and MANEA TEODORA Abstract: Mental health is more than a specific field of medicine; it involves a cultural understanding of what constitutes a good human. According to this cultural understanding, social attitudes toward people with mental health problems may range from stigmatization to acceptance or even adulation (Plato, Phaidros). We ask what type of understanding mental health professionals have toward these persons in terms of how they conceptualize mental health in present day Romania. The purpose of our work is to introduce a new perspective to the classical philosophical debates with empirical data collected from some indepth interviews with mental health professionals. We are interested in their understanding of mentally ill persons and the way the image of the mentally ill person is reflected in and outside the clinic. The frame theories we will use to analyze this topic are existential analysis, phenomenology (Heidegger: Being and Time, 1927) and poststructuralism (Foucault: The History of Madness, 1961 and The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception, 1963). Keywords: Mental health, mentally ill persons, phenomenology, poststructuralism Why Mental Health and Philosophy? First, for thousands of years \"the mind\" was the main issue for philosophical reflection in order to describe, to understand, and to normalize our rationality. Second, through the definition of our rationality, we show how we understand non-rationality or irrationality. To be irrational means either not to accept the common norms of rationality or to act in a way that ignores the effects and the logical norms of thinking. 1 Acknowledgement: This article was written within the Project \"Postdoctoral Studies in the Field of Health Policies' Ethics\", POSDRU/89 /1.5/S/61879, co-funded by the European Social Fund through the Sectorial Operational Program for the Human Resources Development 2007-2013, theme no.3: \"Ethical Perspectives and Determinants of Access of Vulnerable Persons and Groups to Health Services\". 282 Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian, Manea Teodora Rational behavior that is opposed to irrational behavior can start with expressing emotions in an exaggerated way, and with paranoia. The concept of rationality is not a descriptive one; we think that it is a very strong normative concept. But rationality is, as are all human things, subject to historical experience, so the meaning of rationality and irrationality may change with time. Often, we need a little bit of irrationality to break or to critique conventions. When something goes wrong with the mind of a person, as when the expected rational behavior is not accomplished, this can be labeled as mental illness, but we must not forget that \"mental health\" is a concept we invented and agreed on in order to describe someone's mental functioning or reasoning capacities. It implies an understanding of a normally functioning mind and a healthy person. So, the persons experiencing mental health problems are not only ill, but are also prevented from sharing with the community one of the most dignifying qualities of a human being, that of \"being rational.\" The existential dimension of people affected is very complex and far too dramatic to be ignored. Mental Health as Seen in Different Historical Paradigms Throughout the ages, the study of mental health and, in opposition, mental illness, has focused upon different characteristics of persons (physical, emotional, spiritual) according to the predominant paradigm at a specific historical time. For Plato (Phaedrus 244a-245c) madness was seen as a gift given by the gods. He shows a very positive attitude toward madness: madness can give us some of the best things we have. There are four kinds of divine madness: 1. the gift of prophecy (from Apollo); 2. Mystic rites (from Dionysus); 3. Poetry (from the Muses); and 4. Love (from Aphrodite). Whether or not we believe that the madness of love is sent by a god to benefit the lover and the beloved, we should agree that love and madness are, as concepts, very closely related. In his archaeology, Michael Foucault analyzed different aspects of rationality in different periods of time. The philosophy of the Renaissance, for example, changed the relationship between rationality and madness present in the Middle Ages into a reflection on rationality and wisdom. Madness started to be regarded as a complementary form of knowledge. Furthermore, madness could now be used as a tool to critique rationality itself. Another strange situation is present in the Christian way of thinking, which agreed on two paradoxical forms of rationality: human reason and divine reason. For human reason, the divine one sometimes appears to be madness. In conclusion: madness seems to be perceived as being a part of rationality, and only a third perspective, wisdom, can discern between rationality and madness. Modernity has experienced, in the vision of Foucault, the classical experience of madness in two major notes: \"mad people\" are Understanding Mental Health 283 institutionalized, and rationality and madness are in opposition, as two contradictory concepts. This point of view still seems to be widely accepted today in understanding madness. We share with the modern experience of madness the fact that madness is objectified and transformed into an object of study; it is a positum opposed to ratio. In order to underline the existential dimension of people experiencing mental illnesses, we will ask in Heidegger's manner: in what way does the mentally ill person ek-sists? \"To exist\" means for Heidegger to be open to other people, to allow others to come to you, to be in the world, to appear, or to become. Literally, it means \"to stand out.\" Are those people really opening to others or are they rather closing into themselves? If they are feeling rejected or constantly under suspicion from the others, their world will be reconstructed on certain grounds. Can we really understand the grounds of their world? On what basis? We can suspect their perceptions of \"reality,\" but do they or do they not have the right to construct that reality? To what extent could this reality be really dangerous for us? How afraid are we of alternative ways of defining or understanding \"reality\"? Is our reality itself so fragile that we have to protect it from alternative ways of description and re-definition? Today's Definition of Mental Health The current conceptualization of mental health describes either a level of cognitive (or emotional) well-being or an absence of a mental disorder. In fact, mental health is more than the absence of mental illness. This concept may include, from the perspective of positive psychology, multiple facets: the individual's ability to enjoy life (and the right balance between living in the past, present, and future), resilience (seen as the process of interaction between one person and the environment, appealing to protective factors which reduce the action of risk factors) (Ionescu S., Blanchet A., 2009), a balance between different activities in someone's life, flexibility (emotional as well as cognitive) as opposed to rigidity, and selfactualization (the process of actualizing the inner potential). The World Health Organization defines mental health as \"a state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her own abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a contribution to his or her community.\" (WHO 2005) Nowadays, even if there is no one \"official\" definition of mental health, this concept can be understood without restricting its interpretation across cultures. However, cultural differences, subjective assessments, and competing professional theories all affect how \"mental health\" is defined. (WHO 2001) Normality and Abnormality, and the Boundaries Between Them Madness – understood as the otherness of a person – and normality 284 Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian, Manea Teodora represent, as mentioned, an invention and a discovery necessary for a knowing intellect to understand the complexity of mental phenomena of the inner life. In other words, \"madness\" was invented, paradoxically, to explain and justify the normal (Enăchescu C., 2008, p.80). But the human person includes them both in potentiality, and these two facets are inseparable and must be analyzed together. If we separate madness from normality to better understand the human person, we will separate the parts of a whole, thus abolishing the subject of psychology, which is the pure subject (Enăchescu C., 2006), the correspondent of the \"inner sense\" of which Maine de Biran spoke. The characteristics of normality are the state of sintonicity (in its relations with the external world) and equithymia (balance and internal order), representing the fact of \"being in accordance with the world,\" \"to be consistent with others,\" and \"to be in correlation with the norms of the world.\" In contrast, madness is dysthymic and brings a fracture of what is intelligible between the knowing intellect and the object of knowledge; epistemic medical and psychiatric discourse, based on observations and statistics, serves to diagnose and introduce drug treatment for insanity, but it cannot express, ontologically and axiologically speaking, what defines a mad person. This task is taken over by philosophy and psychology. Philosophy is the one that reinstated madness – mental illness – in the sphere of human sciences, thus providing a path of understanding on which psychiatry has advanced very little so far. If we try to give an answer to the fundamental question \"What is madness?\", we must first define the field of the normal: where the normal ends and madness begins. Formally, all that is not in conformity with the norm is abnormal and, thus, opposed to normal. But what is the \"norm\"? The norm is a standard model identified by a group that establishes and manages the specific conduct of that group (Enăchescu C., 2008, p.103104). Moreover, the norm is a value, because the fact of \"being\" and \"not being\" is evaluated in relation to an internalized value. Concerning the etymology of the word, \"norm\" in Latin means a right angle, something that does not fluctuate to the right or the left, something that is squarely in the middle. \"Omalos,\" from which the word \"anomaly\" stems, is a Greek term, and it means something equal, regular, and smooth. Anomaly is the opposite of regularity. In this case, regularity would be the quality of something without anomalies. \"Normal,\" as a term, is, on one hand, qualifying, implying applying a value to, a goal an individual wants to achieve, and on the other hand, descriptive, indicating an average, something that, in a way, is everyone. Establishing Norms To put a rule in a certain context is somewhat compelling: it puts a certain exigency on an existence, which by its variability may seem strange Understanding Mental Health 285 or hostile to others. So the multitude of ways in which something can occur is limited, resulting in few clear categories that sometimes have sharp boundaries between them. This is not the case regarding the delimitations between \"normal\" and \"abnormal.\" A rule is a convention widely shared by a community of people. Axiologically speaking, the norm is a value, but a value turned into an imperative: \"you must be X, you must be Y, and, ultimately, you must be normal.\" Psychiatry The main object of psychiatry would be activity on the borderline between normal and pathological. We could even refer to the contact boundary between what is meant by \"normal\" on one hand, and \"abnormal\" on the other, because only by defining this transitional state one can understand the content of the concept of the \"abnormal.\" M. Lăzărescu (1994) stresses that when talking about the issue of \"normal-abnormal,\" we are considering more the statistical approach. The rules and laws and the issue of \"disease\" are correlated more to the casuistry and to the concrete case, which are less susceptible to the statistics. Approaches of Mental Health Tudose F., Tudose Cătălina, and Dobranici Letiţia (2002) consider that mental health can be regarded in four different and complementary ways. First, the mentally healthy person can be placed on a continuum. If we were to score behavior on a scale, normality is the major part of a continuum, that of the middle of this continuum, and the extremes are the abnormality. Health is the complex product of several parameters of organic and social life, all in dynamic equilibrium, resulting in a realistic-logical vision of the world, a psychological and social discipline on the background of the joy of living and of the balance between introversion and extroversion. H. Ey considers that the mentally ill person lacks both outer and inner freedom. (However, the person with a mental disorder is not considered today, in the light of new psychiatrists, ill or sick.) G. Ionescu (1995) believes that health is an ideal state and disease is an imbalance at all levels of the organism. Second, mental health is a result of a statistical process, where the average is equivalent to normality. The classic bell-shaped distribution, the \"normalized\" Gauss curve, compels us to enter under this bell and to respect the definitions of the terms \"mean\" and \"standard deviation\" for each phenomenon of mental life, from IQ to the meaning of the term \"normal.\" The extreme is thus deviant from the mean. The phenomena that occur often are normal; those that are rare are considered anomalies. So, if we have to make the decision whether I am normal or not, the answer to 286 Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian, Manea Teodora this question stands only in a given socio-economic and historical community, the community to which I belong. Usually, we consider that someone is normal if he or she is acting like all the others who make up the majority of people in his/her society, and if this person can carry on with familiar cultural traditions learned from his or her parents, doing the same activities in the same manner as his or her parents. The symptoms of mental illness are always opposed, in one way or another, to the social norms: the choice of the symptom is negatively determined by the social norms. François Laplantine considers that \"you are not becoming mad as you want; culture foresaw everything. In the core itself of the development of neurosis and psychosis, by which we try to free ourselves from it, culture joins us again to tell us what changed type of personality we need to adopt.\" (quoted by R. Jaccard, p.16) Third, perfect mental health, or a person with perfect mental health, is a utopia. It is established as an ideal for normality, for both the individual and the entire community. It is not only important how someone is manifest in a given culture, but also how he or she would ideally like to be. Balanced and harmonious functioning of the mind and body leads to an optimal level which, most of the time, is unattainable. The ideal normal is relative to the culture that describes it in terms of certain values, according to F. Cloutier (Tudose et al., 2002). Beginning with Freud, who said \"normality is an ideal fiction,\" moving to E. Erikson's stating that \"normality is the ability to master your periods of life,\" the authors conclude with R.E. Money-Kryle that \"Normality is the ability to achieve full self-consciousness, which is never actually fully achieved. \" Fourth, mental health can be viewed as a process. Normal behavior is the final result of subsystems that interact with each other, so changes and processes are essential for normality, rather than the transversal defining of normality. In fact, these four approaches are overlapping and can be used simultaneously or successively when we want to emphasize one side or another of mental normality. This demarche is intuitively done by mental health specialists, and also by philosophers and those without previous medical training. Contemporary Approaches and Understanding of Mental Health in Romania The purpose of our study is to correlate classical philosophical debates with the contemporary view of mental health professionals. In order to understand their opinions about the concept of mental health today in Romania, we collected nine indepth interviews, eight with psychiatrists and one with a psychiatric nurse who is also a psychologist, in a psychiatric hospital in the city of Iasi, Iasi County, over a period of two months (MayJune 2011). Understanding Mental Health 287 Usually, in-depth interviews are a useful qualitative data collection technique that can be used for a variety of purposes, including motivation and needs assessment, the holistic understanding of the interviewee's point of view or situation, and exploring interesting areas for further investigation. In our case, we wanted to explore in depth the modality of understanding a concept and of putting it into practice. This type of interview is most appropriate for situations in which the researcher wants to ask open-ended questions that elicit depth of information from relatively few people. Researchers engage with participants by posing questions in a neutral manner, listening attentively to participants' responses, sometimes asking follow-up questions and probes based on those responses. They do not lead participants according to any preconceived notions, nor do they encourage participants to provide particular answers by expressing approval or disapproval of answers given. (Mack N. et al., 2005, p.29). This last aspect is very important in our study, because we focused on the definition of a concept subject to all sorts of interpretations and for which people are strongly inclined to theorize and generalize. In our interviews, we highlighted the following major themes: the concept of normality; the definition of mental health from the perspective of professionals, and respectively in the opinion of psychiatric patients as seen also by the professionals; and the image of the mentally ill person, reflected in and outside the clinic. The responses obtained from our interlocutors can be largely integrated in the four approaches mentioned above. Usually, the respondents submitted responses in more than one approach, and offered examples from both the clinic in which they work and life outside the hospital. Seeing mental health as a continuum and a result of a statistical process, one participant said that\"Madness should be redefined. There is not a clear definition. Is the Gaussian curve, normality, the extreme? You can go to one side or another.\" The interlocutor feels the need to redefine insanity because he does not find the right place for it on the Gaussian curve (insanity is not a \"discrete\" concept, with \"0\" or \"1\" values, but is of a continuous type): normality should be in the midst of it, and extremes (which are generally called \"abnormality\" without any further explanation) are dangerous, because one can \"fall into\" them. Situating himself in the second and the third approach, another psychiatrist says that \"Mental health is something dictated by the majority. Like me? Like me and my colleagues? I haven't found a definition...maybe a statistical one. As a functioning member of society, a person is healthy if he is doing what most people are doing: having a job, a family, respecting the cultural norms of the society in which he is born – but I don't think this is a definition of health. Outsiders see the mentally ill person as we see him: he is healthy if he's doing the same things as I am doing. For example, what a Roma person is doing in his own community is normal, but for anyone 288 Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian, Manea Teodora outside his culture, maybe it is not. The same for the Hezbollah terrorist. The concept of mental health is singular, not like the one for blood pressure, where if you have 120 over 80 you are healthy. There are exceptions: normality for someone for blood pressure can be of 180 over 100 all his life. Also, blood pressure is palpable, and can be measured, but with mental health we have sensitive criteria.\" Mental normality cannot benefit from \"norms\": a concept considered by cardiologists, and widely recognized by them, as \"good (or normal, or standard) blood pressure\" cannot be translated easily into the mental health field. If we continue the above example, psychiatrists cannot use for comparison the concept of \"120 over 80\" in mental health. Especially since this \"120 over 80\"-type norm, even if this concept could exist, would be different from one socio-cultural group to another. Thus, for each given community in a specific historical moment, there should exist a working definition of mental health that would make possible the communication and cooperation between specialists. Considering that mental health is the result of a process developed in time, we have the following answer: \"Mental health, as well as somatic health, is a balance that someone possesses or not: the psychic balance. I am referring to the equilibrium state felt by each person. \"I am healthy\" equals \"all works well.\" The balance within you, with the outside world...there are some types of people who feel good about themselves, but there is an imbalance with the outside world, and some have no consciousness of illness, but others perceive him as being different. The balance within oneself and with the outside world, if it's not perceived by the person, is perceived by others. At an intuitive level, yes, the man in the street believes the same thing. Mental balance equals the harmonious state between you and others. I think we all perceive this harmony.\" In this case, the psychiatrist puts great emphasis on the equilibrium state, the balance of the person within himor herself (the balance between the various psychological components) and the balance of the person with others and with the environment. In terms of balance between individual and environment, what matters is the consciousness of disease; if a person doesn't have that consciousness, he/she can feel mentally healthy, even if others consider him/her as being sick (unbalanced). This doctor gave the example of a person who received a diagnosis of schizophrenia, but didn't recognize himself as having an illness; that is why he didn't accept medical treatment. This situation bothered his family members, who declared to the doctor that the person concerned was agitated, aggressive with others, and used violent language \"during the crisis\" (when he suffered from auditory hallucinations and delusions), facts which, of course, were not recognized by the patient as real. In psychiatric language, this is called \"lack of criticism.\" Even if the person is considered to be in good internal balance, family members declared implicitly that the external balance, the \"harmony,\" was destroyed. This situation is very well known by all mental health professionals. Understanding Mental Health 289 The next psychiatrist began his discourse doubting the existence of a single kind of mental health. Then he referred to a famous psychiatric manual defining mental disorders and its discussion of the metaphor of madness: \"Mental health...it exists, it does not exist...[Asked if there are differences of definition of this concept] Yes, it's pretty well covered! The palette, the symptomatical range in depression grows and grows..see DSM IV2. Basically, now it's very easy to give a diagnosis of depression, for everyone can be included in that range.The man on the street thinks that mental health..means...the more you see that your reality comes close to the reality of others, the more you can say you're not crazy. If our realities are different, this means the other is crazy. These metaphors are thus created in a meaningful way. Crazy = [psychiatric hospital's name] = psychiatrist. Different realities? Different concepts: so I've got [the doing of a thing in a specific way], why are you not doing things like me? Each comes into a relationship with his or her own baggage. These differences make us consider the other as being crazy. He who has a different mentality will hardly accept yours.\" We come here to describe a situation that some psychiatrists foresaw a long time ago: if the symptomatology of some mental illnesses becomes richer, more detailed, and more expanded from one edition to another of the DSM manual, the result would be that all, or at least, almost all, people suffer, have suffered, or will suffer from a mental illness at some point during their lifetime. From this point of view, to be \"normal,\" psychically speaking, requires a definition tailored to a specific temporal moment. Moreover, my mental health is defined in relation to the mental health of my neighbor, who is part of the same community: this view has been expressed by other mental health professionals (medical doctors, psychologists, social workers, and even priests) who all state that the decision-making process about a person's mental health is taken gradually, in small steps, through continuous comparisons to the significant others in his/her environment, to those with whom the person shares his \"baggage.\" In another conversation with a psychiatrist (held separately from this study) we were given the idea that \"There are over one hundred diagnostics in psychiatry. During your life span you will suffer from at least one.\" This idea had not been expressed with pessimism, but with precision and safety: the statement was based on real, recent statistics, according to which any of us, including the people involved in that dialogue, are likely to receive a 2 \"The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM) is a comprehensive classification of officially recognized psychiatric disorders. The fourth version, DSM-IV, was issued in 1994. The most recent version is the \"Text Revision\" of the DSM-IV, also known as the DSM-IV-TR, published in 2000. The DSM-IV organizes each psychiatric diagnosis into five dimensions (axes) relating to different aspects of disorder or disability, depression being included among the most common axis 1 disorders. The next version DSM-V is due for publication in May 2013. 290 Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian, Manea Teodora diagnosis of a mental disorder and thus to experience \"from the inside\" the changes in the meaning of the concept of \"mental health.\" A psychiatrist offered us a comprehensive approach to mental health, both in terms of the officially recognized definition of the World Health Organization, and from his perspective as a practitioner who dealt with this issue even through the eyes of an outsider to the hospital. \"A general definition of health, a state of well-being, from the physical, mental, and social point of view, I think, is a comprehensive definition of what I know, and the World Health Organization uses these parameters. Asked if he adheres to this definition, he answered: Yes. Regarding mental health, there are some norms by which it is estimated. It may be a statistical norm, in which the person should fall within a certain range, like most people; it can be a norm accepted by others, but a genius who is not in that scale does not necessarily suffer from a mental disorder... quite the contrary. So it's a statistical aspect, one accepted by others, one in terms of employer or society, one measuring whether the person can perform correctly his tasks at work and can relate properly in society. If we are talking about criteria for mental illness, other discussions occur; we can open a manual and take a look. Asked how he thinks this concept is put into practice: A person's state of wellbeing is compatible with others' wellbeing, others who accept and value the person, and consider him as normal in all respects. These two aspects go together. As a person, he feels good, and others feel good with him as well. So one aspect is not enough? No. Maybe the depressive persons hide themselves. They seem normal. But when they remain alone, they are overwhelmed with doubts, thoughts. They dissimulate. Or vice versa, the person feels good about himself, but not the others with him – could we say that? Yes, for example: in the manic episode, the person feels very good about himself. He feels like a flower, he blooms, it's powerful, but the others discern some problems. Yes, you need a balance. Beyond the issues already discussed about some other parts of the interviews, such as the relationship between internal wellbeing and openness to the environment, what is being presented here is an idea worthy of note, namely, that we have to avoid the tendency to consider the extremes of the Gaussian curve as being automatic signs of mental abnormality. A brilliant person (a genius of mathematics or music, for example) is not mentally \"normal\" in Gaussian terms, because genius, being a rare phenomenon, is statistically \"abnormal.\" However, we could not put a sign of equivalence between genius and mental abnormality on the basis of frequency of occurrence of the phenomenon only; there must also be considered the criterion of utility, or what that person brings to the community, his/her degree of integration. We could mention here the famous example of van Gogh, the gifted Dutch Post-Impressionist artist, Understanding Mental Health 291 who had his life shattered by mental illness. Vincent van Gogh suffered from Bipolar I Disorder at a time in history when there was no treatment for this common disorder. Tragically, van Gogh died of suicide. Today van Gogh is considered a genius, his contribution to universal culture is indisputable, and his \"abnormality\" saved him, on one hand, from the anonymity of history, while on the other hand it pushed him to death. Reporting himself, as a specialist, to the perspective of the average people: What does the common person understand from this concept? He would probably define it just from the external point of view. He would refer to others and would say that the respective person should fit in certain norms and that one shouldn't find in that person items that can be included in a mental illness. From the information he has, from what was written in press, TV, Internet, or from family information about societal norms, he shouldn't be able to associate or to notice anything different or disturbing in the overall behavior of an individual. So it's more a matter of efficiency in the relationships with others. Yes, he should not change the behavior that he has always had. I am speaking now as someone who is not in the medical field. If someone was mainly concerned about racing until that moment, he shouldn't suddenly go to the monastery – it's a sharp change. I gave an example that is perhaps exaggerated. He should be able to have a decent conversation, to respond to my requests, and I should be able to respond to his; that means he could provide and offer answers and questions, and to behave decently in society, having a presence. (Behavior) He may change it, but within a longer period, because life or school intervene; but not a major change in a period of days or weeks. Then we should seek answers. \" In this fragment, the psychiatrist focuses on the continuity of behavior as a criterion for defining a person as being mentally healthy. It's not the behavior itself that counts, but its qualitative continuity (same type of behavior for a longer period of time). In other words, a person is normal if, being in a monastery for some time (thus being more of an introvert), he will continue to do so in the future. He will be predictable for others, who will feel safe because they can foresee his behavior. If he decides that, from the monastery, an environment that conventionally favors introversion, he goes directly to participate in racing, where he has to behave in an extroverted manner, and this change occurs suddenly (within a few days or weeks), then his behavior is no longer predictable, so the people in his environment might feel insecure. So my good mental health brings help to the structure and continuity of relations over time in the socio-cultural environment in which I am situated; my mental imbalance affects, in a systemic way, all others, so that they can not relate to me and to one another in the same manner as before; thus it asks them to make a permanent readjustment, which requires time and effort. Not everyone is able or willing to make these efforts, and hence appear the difficulties of integration into society by persons with mental disorders. 292 Tebeanu Ana-Voichiţa, Macarie George-Florian, Manea Teodora Another psychiatrist says the mental health concept holds multiple specialties: \"The concept of mental health...For me it's a vague concept. Mental health is a combination of multiple specialties. You can have something organic that triggers in you a mental disorder. But the organic part is not our prerogative. Or the mental disorder is developing something organic. So the endocrinologist or neurologist has to combine their treatment with ours. Mental illness, for people nowadays, equals madness. For them it is normal or abnormal, disease or no disease; in the middle there is nothing. They don't know there is a state of remission or plateau. They perceive mental illness as being different from any organic disease. So it has always been.Psychiatry is a border discipline. It is in part psychology and in part medicine; each has to give something. Psychiatry needs the contribution of all. The mentality of all people must change.\" For this interlocutor, psychiatry consists of more than diagnosing and treating so-called \"psychiatric\" disorders; this discipline relates to other medical fields, exactly because the human being is a whole, which suffers, simultaneously or in turn, from mental or somatic illnesses, and sometimes the border between them is difficult to detect. One example would be the conversion disorders. The idea raised by this psychiatrist, partly related to a topic previously mentioned by another interlocutor (genius and its place on the Gaussian curve), is that the person with an average medical education tends to push any behavior deviant from the norm to one extreme, and to the other extreme of the scale is normality. The person is thinking without awareness of the infinitesimal gradations of the conditions that mental health may take on its way from normality to abnormality in a particular person at a given moment in time. Mental illness is thus sent to the extreme of abnormality, but not in a way so categorically as in the past. M. Foucault mentioned what happened to fool people, from the middle of the seventeenth century until the late nineteenth century: the \"alienated\" throughout Europe, were closed into so-called general hospitals, along with other categories of people – beggars, poor persons, individuals with physical handicaps or suffering from sexually transmitted diseases, the elderly, exiled priests, unemployed – in short, all those located \"outside\" the social norms established in that historical moment. Today, of course, we stand far from this vision. To change our common mentality, the development of social and human sciences and the social, cultural, economic, and political changes in the last three centuries have all brought their contribution. The working definitions of mental health and, respectively, of mental disorders, that serve as a basis for discussion and as a starting point for any scientific discourse in the fields of psychiatry and clinical psychology stand as proof of the efforts of objectification of these concepts. The definition of mental health focuses not only on the lack of symptoms and clinical signs, but on the general wellbeing of the person, thus attracting attention to his/her totality, as a unitary individual, and implicitly on the necessity of his/her membership Understanding Mental Health 293 and integration into a social group; each person feels good in his or her way. Sometimes we all have problems, some benefit from what Plato called divine madness, and we all ek-syst (in the sense of Heidegger's term), having the right to create our own reality. And it is the society that deals, in general, with the rightness of this reality, as seen in the philosophical theories and debates mentioned in this study. Chronologically, the specific social context is the first to give the right of veto on this inner reality, and only in a second moment should the physicians recognize, describe, and offer a diagnostic for persons with mental problems. University of Medicine and Pharmacy \"Gr.T.Popa\" Iaşi, Romania anatebeanu@yahoo.com\n\nCHAPTER XXIII CHANGES AND CHALLENGES IN STATEMENTS ON THE QUALITY OF DYING1 GABRIEL ROMAN Abstract: Understanding end-of-life care quality has been a priority for many researchers for the past few decades. It may vary, according the patients', caregivers', and health care professionals' perspectives. The aim of this paper is to determine the perception of the meanings of a \"good death,\" by reviewing changing patterns of the quality of death statement in the traditional and contemporary Romanian communities, paying particular attention to differences between the past and the present. For the past, the investigation of the ethnographic material, narrative folklore, and ecclesiastical art has disclosed that we may \"categorize\" good death as having a social, psychological, and spiritual character, a time, and a spatial aspect. Nowadays, we often talk about the quality of dying in the context of palliative care system, but the determination of death quality is limited to medical, philosophical, legal, and ethical issues. Medical responses to symptom management appear, in this context, to offer a routinized response to the uncertainty of dying rather than the psychological, social, and spiritual counselling needed to help facilitate a good death. A real difficulty in talking about making a good death is evident not just in the palliative care community, but in broader Western society, and that is also analized in this study. Keywords: good death, traditional community, ethics, palliative care, terminal patient. INTRODUCTION The influencing aspect of consciousness of death is active over the entire life cycle and it is not restricted to the sick or aged. The meaning of death is multidimensional and varies not only between individuals, but within the same person.2 Dying and death have psychological, spiritual, and social features and are not merely biological events. 1 Acknowledgement: This paper was written within The Knowledge Based Society Project supported by the Sectorial Operational Program Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), financed by the European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract number POSDRU 89/15/S/61879. 2 Herman Feifel, \"Attitudes Toward Death: A Psychological Perspective\" in Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 33 (1969), 3, p. 292. 296 Gabriel Roman What do we mean when we say that someone had a good death? Talking about a person's death focuses upon its perceived \"goodness\" or \"naturalness.\" The aim of this study is to focus attention on the values of the human person, considered under the changes of the contemporary process of globalization. Paradoxically, the continuous qualitative increase of the quality of life causes more and more fragmentation in the human being's understanding of himself and his own cultural and social environment. Within this perspective we identified new challenges addressed to the present role of the humanities, medicine, and technology, which entail a diagnosis of classical, modern, and postmodern models of thinking related to the problems of a good death. In the Romanian area, the Thanatos continues to be dominated by archetypal symbols, superstitions, and rites, in a dramatic confrontation between archaic and modern mentality. Finally, the study will provide the special opportunity to discuss the extent to which medical and scientific measures erode traditional religious consolations for the problems involved in dying and bereavement.3 ROMANIAN FOLK TRADITION OF PENDING DEATH \"Death itself cannot be more than an indifferent reality; just the way we look at and understand it is unable to give it some sense, negative or positive.\"4 In the world of the Romanian village, people treated death as something to fear, but in some respects also as something to be welcomed. In the collective mind, the fate of man is guided from above, by the Supreme Being, not in the sense of a protestant predestination, but of a divine prescience. The belief that all unhappy events are from God and are the natural consequence of a violation of moral precepts is often expressed as \"the Lord's rebuke,\" and used as a means of understanding these events. Death, the event of the last human route, occurs under the sign of this divine acceptance. As a result, the Romanian peasant's preparation for death can take on a rigorous character of self-examination, repentance, and a final submission to the will of God. The stigma of sudden death, horrifying in the West during the Middle Ages, did not decisively influence the Romanian mentality, which felt no need to explain it in terms of the dichotomous scheme good death/bad death.5 In the Medieval concept, a dignified death should offer respite and warning. Accepting unavoidable aging or suffering may be an opportunity 3 Clive Seale, \"Changing Patterns of Death and Dying\" in Social Science & Medicine, 51 (2000), 6, p. 917. 4 Cristian Bădiliţă, Călugărul şi moartea. Eseu despre imaginea şi faptul morţii în monahismul egiptean, translate by Ingrid Ilinca (Iaşi: Polirom, 1998), p. 196. 5 Cristina Dobre-Bogdan, Imago mortis în cultura română veche (sec. XVII-XIX) (Bucureşti: Ed. Universităţii, 2002), p. 148. Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 297 for spiritual growth through humble submission.6 This kind of premonition was perceived as positive and natural. Unnatural was the sudden death (mors repentina), that would deprive the man of the rites of passage. In various parts of the country, people believe that the man who is long tormented by earthly diseases or trials until he dies has committed serious sins, or that he has been cursed by someone or has cursed himself. A violent or painful death indicates some fault and is seen as punishment. Instead, the good death is always serene and, if it happens to still have a long struggle, it is because of the sins of relatives. From the Christian perspective, these categorizations are unsubstantiated or even false, because the judgments on others never belong to people, but are God's decision. An extraordinary world is revealed in the ethnographic account of traditional mortuary practices. The traditions, situated at the confluence of the religious point of view on death and the folkloric perspective, are relatively more folkloric, although the ideas descend from the religious arena. Our approach would be incomplete without an analysis that is based on popular piety and the role that Christian tradition has had in shaping the collective mind. \"The key to mental preparation for death,\" notes I. Ghinoiu, \"is the three legacy systems: biological (birth of children), material (fortune left behind) and spiritual (cultural). Of these, the most valuable heritage that one can leave is the extending of his genealogy by children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren.\"7 Perpetuation of genealogical lineage was tantamount to the defeat of death. In Wallachian iconography, we can find scenes of Samson's fight with the lion8 and the motif of the stork (a symbol of the regeneration of life), interpreted by A. Paleologu as defeats of death: \"The exterior painting of the monuments of Wallachia proposes a comprehensive program of philosophizing, not so much on the precariousness of existence, but on the theme of life and the value of hope.\"9 Another interesting scene is the meeting between the Old Man and Death, according to an Aesop's fable, which narrates the return of an old man from the forest with a heavy load of firewood in his back. Exhausted, he calls for his Death, but when Death comes, the old man says he called it out just to settle the wood better on his back. The amusing character of the old man's reply sent to the motif of the tricked Death, frequently encountered in folklore and processed by Ion Creanga in the tale \"Ivan 6 Hugo Tristram Engelhardt Jr, Ana Smith Iltis, \"End-of-Life: the Traditional Christian View,\" in Lancet, 366 (2005), p. 1046. 7 Ion Ghinoiu, Lumea de aici, lumea de dincolo : ipostaze româneşti ale nemuririi (Cluj-Napoca: Casa Cărţii de Ştiinţă, 1999), p. 182. 8 Maria Golescu, \"Prea puternicul Samson\" in Buletinul Comisiunii Monumentelor Istorice, XXXIII (1940), fasc. 104, pp. 86-87. 9 Andrei Paleolog, Pictura exterioară în Ţara Românească (sec. XVIIIXIX) (Bucureşti: Meridiane, 1984), p. 59. 298 Gabriel Roman Turbincă.\"10 Not incidentally, in the center of the scene depicting the wheel of life at the Păpuşa hermitage (county of Vâlcea), one can read the words: \"I was born to live,\"11 a reflection of a vehement denial of death. Through his offspring, one that passes away feels that somehow he stays here, the children being not just followers of the family's name and fate, but also a guarantee for the deceased that they will fulfill all the rituals required by tradition. The man was early in preparing for death, living with the thought of passing away, preparing the grave or coffin, the funeral clothes, the drink for the funeral ceremony, the alms or even giving alms during his lifetime. The will – written or verbal – usually included the wishes of the dying man regarding his own funeral and on religious duties of almsgiving. These customs – also currently certified in the world of the Romanian village, but naturalized in the city – are due to the human desire to lessen the burden on survivors and the wish to be sure that traditions will be scrupulously fulfilled after his death.12 \"Passing into forgetfulness\" was more painful than death itself, a fact proven by the existence of documents from princes or boyars expressing the desire to be remembered, along with their entire family, in exchange for donations to the Church.13 Also, in the secular context, there was the desire of perpetuating the name of a hero through his acts of bravery, his fame proving stronger than death. The effect of perpetuating the memory beyond the threshold of death may create good deeds, as the saying \"The horse dies, its saddle remains, man dies, his name remains\" emphasizes. Such phraseological sayings, which refer to \"good death,\" might reflect the former reality of Romanian traditional community, preserving archaic extra-linguistic information. Connection with the generations, both the preceding and the following, is an important element of a good death. This way of perceiving death, specific to the traditional-folkloric model, shows that death does not cause a gap in the relationship with life, but it is a part of life in the natural order of things and is also a form of affirmation of the group's continuity and community. Death is also seen in terms of solidarity with predecessors, of continuity in relation to ancestors, as in the expression \"to add to his ancestors\" in the Old Testament (Genesis 25: 7, 35, 29). Burial is often described as \"going to the ancestors\" or being \"gathered to his people.\" The common way to be related to one's ancestors is the criterion of kinship, 10 C. Dobre-Bogdan, Imago mortis în cultura română veche (sec. XVIIXIX), p. 56. 11 A. Paleolog, Pictura exterioară în Ţara Românească (sec. XVIII-XIX), p. 58. 12 I. Ghinoiu, Lumea de aici, lumea de dincolo: ipostaze româneşti ale nemuririi, pp. 212–214, 216. 13 Iolanda Ţighiliu, Societate şi mentalitate în Ţara Românească şi Moldova. Secolele XV-XVII (Bucureşti: Paideia, 1997), p. 264. Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 299 strongly affirmed by the village cemeteries organization. It reveals that between the two worlds there is a certain social homology, established by continuous relationship.14 I. Ghinoiu underlines the difference between the Medieval Western world and Romanian society regarding the right of inheritance. While in the West the house was inherited by the firstborn, which assumed the military duties of the deceased, in the Romanian territory the house was inherited by the last born, so the worship of ancestors will be perpetuated for longer.15 The firm establishment of Christianity in Romanian society has made its impact on the experience of good and bad death. The assessment of death quality can be made using the varied inventories of preaching or painted images, which can be viewed as the creuset of the mentality of an era.16 For the Romanian peasant, who was a regular churchgoer, a good death is seen as a natural consequence of a Christian life, in accordance with the liturgical litany: \"For a Christian end to our life, painless, blameless, peaceful, and for a good defense at the dread judgment-seat of Christ, let us ask the Lord.\"17 This soothing definition of a good death may be applied only to persons whose life is in accordance with the rules and rigors of Christian thought. Perception of death – as an instrument with an ethical function, involving the rules of a life without excesses – can be found in iconographic representations, where the images of Death are part of the paradigm of \"monstrous\" with hermeneutical function. The unseen things are \"coded\" by the visible ones, tending through their symbolism to make tangible the idea of a good death, especially for the vast number of illiterates. The church tried to make man conscious of the devouring nature of Time and of the hour when the balance of Judgment will show the new, and that this new time, the eternal ontological status, is acquired following a way of living on earth. The idea of the facts of future rewards depending on the positive or negative register in which they were framed is reflected in 14 Corina Mihaela Bejenariu, Moartea şi murirea – de la paradigme tradiţionale la forme contemporane adaptate (Death and dying – from the traditional paradigms to adapted contemporary forms), Abstract of the Ph.D. Thesis, scientific coordinator Professor University Dr. Ion Cuceu, Faculty of European Studies, \"Babeş-Bolyai\" University (Cluj-Napoca, 2010), p. 9. Full text available for download at http://doctorat.ibbcluj.ro/sustinerea_publica/rezumate /rezumate/2010/filologie/BEJINARIU_CORINA_ RO.pdf> [accessed on May 30, 2011]. 15 I. Ghinoiu, Lumea de aici, lumea de dincolo : ipostaze româneşti ale nemuririi (Cluj-Napoca: Casa Cărţii de Ştiinţă, 1999), pp. 214–215. 16 Al. Duţu, Literatura comparată şi istoria mentalităţilor (Bucureşti: Univers, 1982), p. 11. 17 \"Dumnezeiasca Liturghie a Sf. Ioan Gură de Aur\" (The Divine Liturgy). In: Liturghier (The Liturgikon) (Bucureşti: Editura Institutului Biblic şi de Misiune a Bisericii Ortodoxe Române, 2007), p. 131. 300 Gabriel Roman the painting of the Last Judgment Scene, where the death of the righteous versus the sinner's death are represented. The image of these antithetical deaths was alive in the mind of the viewers, becoming an instrument to tune the behavioral code. Providing antithetical models of existential paths at the end of which someone can find salvation, or, conversely, damnation, it is also commonplace for the Romanian funeral oratory. Knowledge of one's imminent death provides a final chance to become reconciled with those whom one has harmed, to ask for God's forgiveness, or to call the priest to fulfill the last Christian duties by performing the Sacraments. These are the rites of passage, involving separation rituals from this world, and rites of aggregation at the world beyond, of which the most important, in Christian thought, is the final communion.18 Some families are reluctant to call the priest because they think the sick might be frightened by the closeness of death. Seriously ill persons, especially the rich, often demanded the administration of the Unction, believing that this service helps for a speedy death or healing.19 S. Fl. Marian stresses an important financial issue in Transylvania: money for the Unction was traditionally gathered at the church or in the community (even if the sacrament was administered to a rich man), with the conviction that this contribution is pleasing to God. However, people should not be allowed to believe in an automatism of this gesture, nor encouraged to ask for it superstitiously, with the conviction that it will provide the recovery or easy death. In such a case, the belief related to the effects of prayers or the effect of Unction is distorted. Again, any charitable gesture of the Christian community is encouraged, but not when it has in view a determined result. Another practice was the gesture of forgiveness to those near and known, especially in circumstances where there had been conflicts. This sequence was highly valued as the last expression of emotional ties with the deceased, the last form of honoring, but also as a form of separation through forgiveness. The people are confident that one who fulfills this gesture dies easily, while one who refuses dies struggling. The gesture is compatible with the Christian principle regarding the need for reconciliation between people or the repair of evil committed. Traditionally, when a man was about to die, the family took care to light a candle at the bedside or in the hands of the dying. The Christian meaning of the gesture – the light is the symbol of Jesus Christ, Light of the world – alternates with the belief that darkness reigns in the other world, and therefore the dead need light so as not to \"lose the soul.\" For those 18 H. Tristram Engelhardt Jr, Ana Smith Iltis, \"End-of-Life: The Traditional Christian View\", p. 1047. 19 Simion Florea Marian, Înmormântarea la români. Studiu etnografic (Bucharest: « Grai şi suflet – Cultura Naţională » Pubishing, 1995), pp. 7–11; I. Ghinoiu, Lumea de aici, lumea de dincolo, pp. 198–204. Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 301 whose death was not accompanied by light, the offspring provided a big candle burning for them during the church services. Death was good, or at least acceptable, after a long life. In the case of a young person's death, when it happened before his or her being wed, the funeral ritual was designed as a marriage ritual.20 This symbolic wedding is illustrated by the ritual of the fir tree accompanying unmarried young people's funerals in Bukovine.21 Another aspect of peacefulness is to die in a place which holds the highest degree of peace: home. Dying at home implies being surrounded by relatives and family. \"The time of death is highly valued, contributing to strengthening social ties, to solidarity between generations, and between earthly life and the world beyond.\"22 Dying in loneliness, away from home, away from relatives and dear ones, is by definition \"bad,\" and can only be partially repaired by bringing the dead body home. \"Life is nothing else than separation from the bowels of the earth; death is reduced to a return home...so frequent desire to be buried in the soil of the homeland is only a secular form of the mystical autochthonism, the need to return to his own house,\" writes Eliade, marking, in the symbolism of privacy, the isomorphism of return, of death, and of housing.23 Being properly buried in one's own land makes death good, or at least acceptable, as a funeral ritual sequence that occurs during the removal of the dead body from a dwelling suggests: breaking a cup or a pot. The gesture refers to the biblical verse: \"You are dust and to dust you shall return.\" (Genesis 3: 19) In traditional Romanian society, death was a private affair. Funerals are public events, but the sickbed and death occur in the seclusion of the house. Death remains \"confidential\" until it is announced and preparations can start for the funeral. Death, indeed, is eclipsed by the funerals in many ways. Sometimes, people may not know about someone's poor physical condition and sickness until it is all over. Summing up, the definition of good death, (and bad – a sudden and unprovided death) does not imply that it is a fixed category. People in Romania regard a peaceful death as a good death. \"Peaceful\" refers to the dying person having finished all business and made peace with others before his/her death, and implies being at peace with his/her own death. It further refers to the manner of dying: not by violence, an accident, or a fearsome disease, and without much pain. A good and peaceful death comes naturally after a long and well-spent life. Such a death preferably takes 20 Petru Caraman, \"Alegoria morţii în poezia populară, la polonişi la români\", Studii de folclor, 2nd vol. (Bucureşti: Minerva, 1988), pp. 69-75. 21 S. Fl. Marian, Înmormântarea la români. Studiu etnografic, p. 68. 22 Lucian Boia, Mitul longevităţii. Cum să trăim 200 de ani, transl. Walter Fotescu (Bucureşti: Humanitas, 1999), p. 146. 23 Gilbert Durand, Structurile antropologice ale imaginarului. Introducere în arhetipologia generală, transl. Marcel Aderca (Bucureşti: Univers Enciclopedic, 1998), p. 231. 302 Gabriel Roman place at home, surrounded by children and grandchildren. Finally, a good death is a death which is accepted by the relatives. To summarize, we may categorize five features accompanying the event of a good death: a social character (being at peace with others, mutually), a psychological character (being at peace with one's own life and soul), a spiritual character (being at peace with God, being prepared for the world beyond) a chronological aspect (dying in the fullness of time), and a spatial aspect (dying at home, surrounded by relatives). The determination of a good death has historically been based on community criteria. The enormous influence exerted by this traditional model of the statement of the quality of a death can be found also in the present. The mental universe of the archaic world has been preserved, and persists in Romanian society; nowadays, it can still be identified in rural locations, where the memory and the connection with ancestors is still alive. PHYSICAL COMFORT AND EMOTIONAL SUPPORT FOR A GOOD ENOUGH DEATH Palliative care is a disciplinary area where contested ideas focus on a principally moral question – what is the best way to die? The multivocality of responses shows that the focus has shifted from the question of dying well to the problem of living well, even until death. Not only should patients live well while dying, they should also be given reign to choose or refuse certain treatments and therapies that may improve their lives and, ultimately, their deaths. An ideological framework is constructed to maintain the value of a good enough death. Just as members of contemporary society are expected to age well with the aid of medical technology and a youthful spirit, dying people are expected to live well until they die and make their own choices in this process. Palliative care operates with the philosophy of a \"good enough\" death and a hierarchy of care which prioritizes the physical management of symptoms for alleviating the patients' pain and physical discomfort.24 Despite the good intentions of practitioners, good death for patients is often not achievable, so many practitioners now accept a good enough ethic. This ethic may be thought of as patient-centered and empowering.25 It brings us 24 Beverley McNamara, \"Good Enough Death: Autonomy and Choice in Australian Palliative Care\" in Social Science & Medicine 58 (2004), p. 929. 25 Cristina Gavrilovici, Beatrice Ioan, Vasile Astărăstoae, \"Paternalism şi autonomie în practica medicală a unei societăţi în tranziţie. Modele temporale şi geografice ale relaţiei medic-pacient.\" in: Bogdan Olaru (ed.), Controverse Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 303 firmly into the world of advanced directives, participatory medical decision-making, and civic law. There is a shifting of responsibility from the social collective to the individual who is dying, bringing a tension between individual choice and communal tradition. What makes death a psychologically appropriate phenomenon?26 Trying to operationalize this concept and to determine a precise definition of a good death can be challenging for the ill persons, family, friends, and health care providers. Steinhauser et al.27 identified six major components of a good death: 1. Pain and Symptom Management; 2. Clear Decision Making (to participate in decisions about treatment options or plans); 3. Preparation for Death (to plan the events that follow their deaths); 4. Completion (finding meaningfulness at the end of life); 5. Contribution to others (discovering that personal relationships are more important than professional or monetary gains, and wanting to share these significant insights about life with others); 6. Affirmation of the Whole Person (being recognized as a unique, whole, and complete person, considered in the context of his/her life, his/her values and personal preferences, and not just as a disease or a case). These six themes add to the overall knowledge about what people believe to be a good death, helping healthcare professionals in this challenging area of medicine. In the study \"Good Death Inventory,\" Mitsunori Miyashita et al.28 identify some core domains: environmental comfort (living in calm circumstances); life completion (having no regrets, feeling that one's life was fulfilling); dying in a favorite place; maintaining hope and pleasure (having some pleasure in daily life); independence (in moving or waking up, with excretion); physical and psychological comfort (being free from pain, free from emotional distress); good relationships with medical staff (trusting the physician, having people who listen); not being a burden to etice în epoca biotehnologiilor (Iaşi: University \"Al. I. Cuza\" Publishing, 2008), p. 56. 26 Donald Lester, \"Psychological Issues in Euthanasia, Suicide and Assisted Suicide,\" in Journal of Social Issues, 52 (1996), 2, pp. 51-62. 27 Karen E. Steinhauser, Elizabeth C. Clipp, Maya McNeilly et. al., \"In Search of a Good Death: Observations of Patients, Families, and Providers,\" in Annals of Internal Medicine. 132 (2000), 10: 825-832. Retrieved May 29, 2011, from <http://www.annals.org/cgi/reprint/132/10/825.pdf>. 28 Mitsunori Miyashita, Tatsuya Morita, Kazuki Sato et al., \"Good Death Inventory: A Measure for Evaluating Good Death from the Bereaved Family Member's Perspective\" in Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 35 (2008), 5, pp. 486-498. 304 Gabriel Roman others (having no financial worries); good relationships with family (having family to whom one can express one's feelings); being respected as an individual (not being treated as an object or a child); religious and spiritual comfort (having faith and feeling that one is protected by a higher power beyond oneself); receiving enough treatment (fighting against disease until one's last moment); control over the future (knowing what to expect about one's condition in the future and participating in decisions about treatment strategy); feeling that one's life is worth living (maintaining one's role in family or occupation); unawareness of death (living as usual without thinking about death); pride and beauty (not exposing one's physical and mental weakness to family, not receiving pity from others); natural death (not receiving excessive treatment, not being connected to medical instruments or tubes); and preparation for death (seeing people whom one wants to see, saying what one wants to say to dear people).29 The World Health Organization defines a good death as occurring in the absence of stress and unnecessary suffering for the patient, family, and for those providing them with care; considering and applying the wishes of the patient and his/her family; and presenting the consensus in a reasonable degree of clinical, cultural, and ethical standards.30 In Romania, palliative care is a relatively new and developing speciality. Usually, terminally ill patients are discharged into the care of family members at home with little support, so the care is usually provided by the family.31 Moșoiu, Andrews, and Perolls typified some of the cultural and ethical issues which must be taken into account in the assessment of palliative care in Romania: \"Romanian society has traditionally been one in which family ties are very strong. The extended family often lives in close proximity. For this reason, home care seems to be more appropriate. Approximately 80% of Romanians belong to the Romanian Orthodox Church. In the Orthodox tradition, there are special rituals surrounding death and bereavement that are concerned with the outward show of grief and remembering the dead. In rural areas, where death is seen as a natural process and communities are stronger, these traditions are better preserved. Conversely, in urban society, the subject of death is seen as somewhat taboo. It continues to be common practice for health care professionals to inform the family of the diagnosis and prognosis before discussing this with the patient, and in some cases the patient is not even told of his or her condition. However, experience has 29 Ibid., pp. 491-492. 30 Harvey Max Chochinov, \"Psychiatry and Terminal Illness\" in Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 45 (2000), pp. 143-150. 31 Luminiţa Dumitrescu, Wim J. A.van den Heuvel, Marinela van den Heuvel-Olaroiu, \"Experiences, Knowledge, and Opinions on Palliative Care among Romanian General Practitioners\" in Croatian Medical Journal, 47 (2006), p. 144. Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 305 suggested that many patients suspect their diagnoses and welcome the opportunity to discuss it.\"32 Both poor education and the bias of health-care professionals against opioids and analgesics in Romania are reflected in statistics that show Romania's annual medical consumption of morphine as being among the lowest in Eastern Europe.33 The country has a very complicated, restrictive, and burdensome system for prescribing opioids that makes it difficult and sometimes impossible for outpatients to receive pain medication. Because the administering of morphine is very often postponed until the last days, the result is unnecessary suffering. Lack of pain control has not challenged the desire to hasten death or the contemplation of assisted suicide. However, in June 2005, the Orthodox Church in Romania expressed its stance on euthanasia: \"Human life is an unrepeatable reality, so it must be defended and cared for every moment and in whatever situation a person finds him or herself.\"34 Because life comes from God, it is intrinsically good, for it is the relationship with the Divinity and with other people that give a human being the status of \"person,\" not only of an \"individual.\" In this way, the person's life has a value in itself and the person, even in suffering, is invaluable.35 \"The person does not empty himself or herself during the biological life, nor does he or she achieve fullness of life solely in the earthly condition, but life in the biological sense of the word is the fundamental condition to prepare the human person for the Kingdom of God.\" The same conciliar act states: \"Our task, in particular for doctors, is to serve life until its end. The man lives even when he is in the terminal stage of physical life.\" In an era when the emphasis is on the biological and the material, it is desirable to understand and experience suffering through the filter of faith. From another perspective, discussing suffering brings the necessity of love and compassion to those who are lonely and dying. The same act provides: \"For this, the patient should be guaranteed freedom to decide on the treatment of terminal stage disease, to be shown solidarity and compassion by others (family, friends, medical staff), and to be given 32 Daniela Moşoiu, C. Andrews, Graham Perolls, \"Palliative care in Romania\" in Palliative Medicine 14 (2000), 1, p. 65. 33 Daniela Moşoiu, Kevin M. Ryan, David E. Joranson et al. \"Reform of Drug Control Policy for Palliative Care in Romania\" in Lancet 367 (2006), 9528, p. 2114. 34 Resolution elaborated by the National Bioethics Commission of the Romanian Orthodox Church, http://www.patriarhia.ro/ro/opera_social_filantro pica/bioetica_2.html [accessed May 30, 2011]. 35 Ştefan Iloaie, \"Morală şi viaţă. Documentele Bisericii Ortodoxe Române referitoare la bioetică\" in Revista Română de Bioetică, 7 (2009), 2, p. 24. 306 Gabriel Roman appropriate medication to alleviate physical and emotional pain, which may become unbearable and even \"dehumanizing,\" as the patient dies with a maximum of conscience and a minimum of pain.\" So what can be done to ease the distress of the patient confronting death? The quality of death depends on a deep understanding of patients' distress in facing death. Death and grief are normal life experiences,36 although there are periods often filled with fear and anger in the framework of the stages so eloquently defined by Elisabeth Kübler-Ross (denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance).37 By truly understanding these stages, someone could look for the opportunity to understand the terminal patient's needs during this frightening and vulnerable period. Based on data from the literature, Pool38 summarizes three characteristics of good death: to die easily, (painless, quiet, dignified, quickly); family involvement in patient care; and good interpersonal relationships, with appropriate communication and conflict resolution. The author noted that all these involve the patient's ability to participate actively in social interactions as evidence of the dying person's control and autonomy in the process of death. The same author believes that we can admit to a consensus on good death as a peaceful end, which occurs at the end of a long and fulfilled life, while death due to accidents, violence, or disease affecting a young person is considered to be unnatural. Ultimately, only the individual in question can determine whether death is good or not. A good death seems to be a death that one would choose if he or she could do so. Dying can also be viewed as a social relationship.39 A person is not simply a \"being,\" but \"personhood\" is a quality attributed to someone by others. Identity is created in the minds of others by a perceived history of social reciprocity, a history of relationships. People become attached to others because of their social relationship to those persons. Many of the recent views from medicine, bioethics, and philosophy in general have emerged because of the desire to engage in discussions with the social and medical sciences about the social nature of dying. Most people who discover they have an incurable disease live with a certain degree of social isolation, whose main cause must be found in discomfort, fear, and the threat felt by healthy individuals in contact with 36 Julia Neuberger, Dying Well: A Guide to Enabling a Good Death, 2nd edition (Oxford: Radcliffe Medical Press, 2004), p. 176. 37 Elisabeth Kübler-Ross, Despre moarte şi a muri [On Death and Dying], transl. Mihail Piruşcă (Bucureşti, Elena Francisc Publishing, 2008). 38 Robert Pool, \"You're Not Going to Dehydrate Mom, Are You? Euthanasia, Versterving, and Good Death in the Netherlands,\" in Social Science and Medicine 58 (2004), 5, pp. 955-966. 39 Allan Kellehear, \"Dying as a Social Relationship: A Sociological Review of Debates on the Determination of Death,\" in Social Science & Medicine 66 (2008), p. 1533. Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 307 them.40 The consequence is an early mourning and a withdrawing into themselves. \"Living a life received as a gift, waiting for pointless visits, with visitors longing, looking out the window, hoping for the emergence of a nurse who would have little time for a discussion...this is how they spend their time, most incurable patients,\"41 in a world that believes that the good death is the sudden one, as much as possible unconscious, but in any case quiet.42 Dying people's positive reaction to the chance of communication is due to man's need to leave behind something of himself, maybe to have the illusion of immortality.43 Before death, everybody tries to share something about the essence of his own person to those who are with him in his last days or hours. McCoy et al. talk about the concept of immortality as a positive illusion44 and Becker shows that one of the possible ways to mitigate the anxiety of death is leaving behind some cultural good that transcends the individual, promising him a symbolic immortality.45 After the death, relationships continue to evolve in memorial practices in the home or during traditional graveyard visits, where \"talking\" with one's dead is historically and sociologically widespread. Furthermore, contemporary people widely report \"interactions\" with their dead relatives in dreams.46 Such interactions with the dead are believed to be reciprocal, and are seen as evidence of this broader human context of dying and death as ongoing social relationships. Therefore, in the assessment of death, the emphasis should be on the inseparable relationship between biology and culture. In other words, any criteria for good death must draw on or consult with cultural sources and ideas wider than merely those from the professions. Ignoring this fact about dying will indeed bring physicians, inevitably, predictably, and unnecessarily into conflict with families of terminally patients. 40 Janice R. Ellis, Elisabeth Ann Nowlis, \"Psychosocial Needs of The Person\" in Nursing. A Human Needs Approach (Boston: Houghton Miffin Company, 1989), p. 408. 41 E. Kubler-Ross, Despre moarte şi a muri, p. 41. 42 Eniko Skolka, Aspecte ale asistenţei bolnavului aflat în stadiul terminal : posibilităţi, limite şi dileme (Cluj-Napoca: Casa Cărţii de Ştiinţă, 2004), p. 206. 43 Ibid., p. 190. 44 Shannon K. McCoy, Tom Pyszczynski, Sheldon Solomon, Jeff Greenberg, \"Transcending the Self: A Terror Management Perspective on Successful Aging\" in Adrian Tomer (ed.), Death Attitudes and the Older Adult: Theories, Concepts, and Applications (Philadelphia: Routledge, 2001), p. 39, availible at http://books.google. com, accessed May 30, 2011. 45 Ernest Becker. The Denial of Death (New York: Free Press, 1973), p. 69, says that the dynamic behind the creation and maintenance of civilization is the repression of our awareness of death. 46 Corina Mihaela Bejenariu, op. cit., pp. 12-13. 308 Gabriel Roman TOWARD A DEATH-DENYING SOCIETY We found it extremely useful to attempt an extension of our approach in contemporary society, in order to capture any changes in attitude, perception, and representation to a problem that seems obsolete in a world where aspiring to eternal youth is the main goal. The eighteenth century brought a change of mentality, with the relationship between the individual and death gradually emerging from the religious influence, adding secular (philosophical, scientific, or civic) connotations.47 In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as medical progress allowed an extension of life, the rhythms of life, especially in large cities, favored an increasing censorship over death. From the beginning of Modernism, death and the dying have been pushed from the center of the family and community to the edges of society. In the industrial world of Europe and North America, death was \"gerontologized,\" becoming distant and distanced.48 People avoid this subject and certainly do not discuss it in public. Changes in religious beliefs and practices have turned society into a \"death-denying\" one.49 The public display of mourning is seen as a form of weakness and indecency, though the public mourning and posthumous deification of celebrities (e.g. Michael Jackson), seems to have taken the place of privacy. Mourning in these cases has became a public spectacle, accessible to all via TV or Youtube. The increasingly technological society potentiates the feeling of isolation and non-comunication, making the patient become more vulnerable when facing death, more alone and helpless. Even medical technology pushes the moment of death ever further away; when ill people die, it is likely this will occur in the company of more machinery than people.50 Hospitals and morgues have replaced the intimacy of the house. According to Kubler-Ross, \"nowadays, agony is more terrible from several points of view, more lonely, more mechanical, and devoid of humanity\" than during the times when medicine had no actual knowledge and resources. Patients may cry for rest, peace, and dignity, but they get infusions, transfusions, and life-support devices to assist the body's vital functions. They get invasive interventions, especially from some specialists 47 Michel Vovelle, La mort et l'Occident, de 1300 à nos jours (Paris: Gallimard, 1983), p. 421. 48 Carol Komaromy, Jenny Hockey, \"Naturalizing Death Among Older Adults in Residential Care\" in Jenny Hockey (ed.), Grief, Mourning, and Death Ritual (Buckingham: Open University Press, 2001), pp. 73–74. 49 Allan Kellehear, \"Are We a 'Death-Denying' Society? A Sociological Review\" in Social Science & Medicine, 18 (1984), 9, p. 713. 50 Robert L. Rubinstein, \"Narratives of Elder Parental Death. A Structural and Cultural Analysis\" in Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 9 (1995), 2, pp. 257-276, emphasizes that the narratives of middle-aged American women about the death of one of their parents interfere with medical reports. Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 309 who are concerned about their heart rhythm, their pulse, their electrocardiogram, their secretions, but not about their person, their humanity. Unfortunately, dying alone is becoming more common as people grow older and \"social death\" makes its entry before physical death. How great is the fear of death! So great is the fear that the dying are not allowed to die.51 The dependence on their own body is prolonged by the dependence on apparatus, and also by the dependence on specialists who can decide whether or not to accept the request for ending the prolonging of one's life under such conditions. Medical apparatus now allows us to keep a body alive and prolong physical existence even after the brain has died – but what then does it mean to be human, and how can someone die in a human way? The medicalization of death means that the pre-twentieth century notion of a good death – surrounded by family, comforted by familiar voices – now belongs to the nostalgic past. The place of death is often considered as an indicator of quality of the end of life.52 If the patient is allowed to spend the last period of life in a beloved and familiar place, then he needs less adaptation efforts.53 Hospital death, although preferred by a few patients and sometimes clinically inevitable, is often considered as suboptimal,54 compared with home care and home death, because the latter are more in accordance with the wishes of the patients, their caregivers, and their health professionals.55 Although most people in Western societies prefer to die at home,56 a study in six European countries showed that of all deaths, from 33.9% (in the Netherlands) to 62.8% (in Wales) occurred in a hospital. The phenomenon is explained by the weakening of religious faith that has led to 51 Alaine Polcz, Ideje a meghalásnak (Budapest: Pont Publishing, 1998), quoted by Eniko Skolka, Aspecte ale asistenţei bolnavului aflat în stadiul terminal, p. 205. 52 David Clark, \"Between Hope and Acceptance: the Medicalisation of Dying\" in British Medical Journal 324 (2002), p. 907. Karen E. Steinhauser, Nicholas A. Christakis, Elisabeth C. Clipp et al., \"Factors Considered Important at the End of Life by Patients, Family, Physicians, and Other Care Providers\" in The Journal of the American Medical Association, 284 (2000), pp. 2476-2482. 53 E. Kubler-Ross, Despre moarte şi a muri, p. 128. 54 Lisa Barbera, Lawrence Paszat, Carole Chartier, \"eath in Hospital for Cancer Patients: an Indicator of Quality of End-of-Life Care,\" in Palliative Medicine 19 (2005), pp. 435-436. 55 Joan M. Teno, Brian R. Clarridge, Virginia Casey et al., \"Family Perspectives on End-of-Life Care at the Last Place of Care\" in The Journal of the American Medical Association 291 (2004), pp. 88-93. 56 Siew Tzuh Tang, \"When Death is Imminent Where Terminally Ill Patients with Cancer Prefer to Die and Why,\" in Cancer Nursing 26 (2003): 249; Siew Tzuh Tang, Ruth McCorkle, \"Determinants of Congruence Between the Preferred and Actual Place of Death for Terminally Ill Cancer Patients,\" in Journal of Palliative Care 19 (2003), p. 236. 310 Gabriel Roman an increased anxiety about death, contributing to the banishment of the death event from the family to within the walls of institutions.57 Progress in medical science has led to an increase in life expectancy in Western society, accompanied by the desire for discovering a remedy against forthcoming death. Some findings can increase the quality of life and help those in distress. There are also intentions and promises that go beyond this medical intervention aspect: eradication of old age, prolonged youth, or eliminating death. Moreover, the offers promise/exhibit, inevitably, economic potential and a guaranteed market success. And, as expected, there emerges a specific vision of life, which increasingly emphasizes the right to a life free of aging, which can be extended as much as the opportunities offered by medicine will allow. The so-called \"transhumanist current\" foresees radical changes in human life. These achievements will help people to have improved capacity, intelligence, health, beauty, and life span, as they earn the label of the \"posthuman species.\" Transhumanism has developed in recent years, with several arguments supporting the fight against aging and suffering, claiming priority of youth and the indefinite extension of life. Ray Kurzveil, for example, identifies the next major step in achieving biological immortality, offered by nanotechnologies and artificial intelligence. He foresees within twenty years the creation of nanobots to be placed in the human body, in order to locate and restore the areas affected by disease.58 In developed countries, antiageing advances would increase life expectancy by a year for each year of the decades from 2010 to 2030. Life spans are going to be so long that people will have no real idea how to plan it. The result would be a huge explosion in older people and vast changes in how people live their lives. \"Current institutions are really not equipped at the moment to deal with such long lives.\"59 Aubrey de Grey, a leader in gerontological engineering, proposed arguments to support the ethics of an indefinite extension of life using medical technology. He argues that refusing to prolong life and its quality by considering and using the remarkable progress achieved so far by science is equivalent to taking action for shortening human life. Nowadays, he says, medicine is obligated to extend the right to life: everyone's right to live as long as he or she wants is guaranteed by the existing technology.60 Ethical considerations concerning these aspects make us suspect the morality that supports these projects. Current scientific knowledge for 57 Joachim Cohen, Johan Bilsen, Julia Addington-Hall et al., \"PopulationBased Study of Dying in Hospital in Six European countries,\" in Palliative Medicine, 22 (2008), 6, pp. 702-710. 58 Thomas D. Kenedy, \"Anti-Aging, Rights and Human Nature,\" in Ethics & Medicine, 25 (2009), 1, pp. 21-22. 59 Leslie M. Thompson, \"The Future of Death: Death in the Hands of Science,\" in Nursing Outlook, 42 (1994), 4, pp. 175-180. 60 Thomas D. Kennedy, \"Anti-Aging, Rights and Human nature\", p. 23. Changes and Challenges in Statements on the Quality of Dying 311 abolishing death leads to some social and psychological implications that the hysterical search for eternal life presents.61 How could we ensure people's right to live as they wish by the achievements of science as long as billions of our fellow men cannot even survive? CONCLUSION This paper has focused on making several observations about past and recent biomedical, spiritual, psychological, sociological, and anthropological features of the quality of death. We may more clearly speak about the syncretism of a few good death peculiarities in our society when both older and newer concepts of death coexist in the minds of people. Is the survey of traditional Romanian society about death relevant to our understanding of modern approaches to this subject? One may note that Romanian peasants seem to react to death in a \"modern\" way, especially in their sober acceptance of death as a reality. Characteristic of the traditional view is that death is the door to a life after death, and that the quality of life before death is decisive for seeing death as good or bad. The determination of death quality is not simply a technical problem, but it depends on the experiences of mortality, mediated by the social understanding of death and dying. This means understanding death and dying at the place where biology and biography meet at their intersections with society and history. Nowadays, a lack of control and a lack of language to talk about making deaths good is evident, not just in the palliative care community, but in broader modern society. Prominence is given to the physical care of patients and to medical responses to suffering and death. The dying person's uncertainty does not need a routinized response to symptom management, but psychological, social, and spiritual counselling to help facilitate a good death. As dying patients are increasingly encouraged to make their own choices, palliative care practitioners find fewer opportunities to lead their patients through a journey toward a good death. The element of individual choice is a reflection of a broader \"postmodern condition,\" and within this context, \"postmodern deaths.\" But, \"as society becomes 'postmodern,' it also becomes vulnerable to the attenuation or loss of beliefs, values, and communication patterns that tradtionally provided its sense of identity and continuity.\"62 The palliative care philosophy, giving credence to the multiplicity of beliefs and communication patterns evident in the collective of dying 61 Basil W. McDermott, \"On the Uncertain Future of Death\" in Futures, 19 (1987), 6, pp. 686-701. 62 Robert Kastenbaum, \"Reconstructing Death in Postmodern Society,\" in Omega, 27 (1993), 1, p. 76, quoted by Beverley McNamara, \"Good Enough Death: Autonomy and Choice in Australian Palliative Care\" in Social Science & Medicine 58 (2004), p. 936. 312 Gabriel Roman patients, is seen in the articulation of a \"good enough\" ethic. Health-care providers are often unprepared to assist patients and families during the dying process. And not only them – members of contemporary Western societies do not know what to say to people who are dying. In postmodernizing society, persistent change has dislodged people from the past while the decline in faith, in rationality, and its promise of continual progress toward a brighter future threatens their ability to link themselves with that future. This suggests that individuals in the postmodern era view themselves only as part of the present. In addition, with the absence of the ability to draw on the overarching, transcendant meanings of death traditionally provided by religion, individuals have only their immediate environment in which to find meaning for death. From the Christian perspective, other spiritual meanings emerge simultaneously with the pragmatic intentions of using the concept of good death. At the core of the consumerist era, when technology favors progress and welfare, the earth is, for many citizens of developed countries, a place of abundance, meant to forget the \"Abraham's side.\" From this perspective, utopian projects, aimed at complete eradication of illness and senescence, could be understood as the intention of introducing a human realm of eternity on earth, a victory over death through science, a kind of salvation through technology. Focusing on the notions of good and bad death in Romania, dying after a long and well-spent life, in the company of dear ones, without pain, while at peace with one's one death, are all features which, in Romanian culture, would contribute to a good death. However, extension of this research could produce useful policy prescriptions. For future policy development, it will be important to include the communities that are directly affected by this concept. Center for Ethics and Health Policy University of Medicine and Pharmacy \"Gr. T. Popa\" Iaşi, Romania garom78@yahoo.com PART III CULTURAL AND SPIRITUAL PERSONALITIES: POSSIBLE ANSWERS TO OUR CONTEMPORARY CHANGES\n\nCHAPTER XXIV ROUSSEAU'S \"CIVIL RELIGION\" RECONSIDERED JOHN FARINA Abstract: Jean-Jacques Rousseau's understanding of religion and civil society was perhaps more nuanced than many of his liberal disciples acknowledge. In its complexities may lay hints for the reformulation of theories of citizenship and religious identity for the twenty-first century. Keywords: Jean-Jacques Rousseau, civil society, civil religion, theory of citizenship, religious identity. In this paper I shall consider the role religion might play in postsecular liberal Western societies. Each of those identifiers requires some clarification. By \"post-secular\" I mean that society has not followed the projection of secularist theorists in any kind of simplistic way. More likely, religion has differentiated itself in multiple forms. Or perhaps modernity itself was not as monolithic as was once thought. The sacred abided alongside the modern in many societies, not only in the much-publicized case of the United States. By \"liberal,\" I mean that which is generally understood as a society in which the government is limited, often by written constitutions, the rights of the individual are maximized, and the role of the church or other religious institutions is structurally separated from the governing power of the state. By \"Western,\" I mean nothing uncommon, but even that distinction is perhaps too simple. This dynamic of religion in the twenty-first century shows amazing resilience across cultures. Religion, like globality, has long had a transnational quality, especially with the religions of what Eliade called \"the sky gods.\"1 My contention is that to understand the role of religion in the postsecular twenty-first century, one must reevaluate its place in the history of liberal society. Starting at the time of the liberal revolutions of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, there grew up in Europe a tendency to write religion out of the story, that is, to embrace a model of liberalism that banished religion to the margins of life, or at least of public life. Paradoxically, at the same time many European societies retained a culture deeply influenced most predominantly by Christianity. But the public rhetoric was stripped of references to religion, especially as seen in the narrative of the anticlerical, often anti-religious left. That narrative was a tendentious one that simplified the role of religion in culture. At no time has 1 Mircea Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane: the Nature of Religion, trans. from French by Willard Trask (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1959). 316 John Farina Europe been post-Christian, unless by that we mean simply that the church has been removed from a privileged place in the political structure. But at no time have even the most secular communist states been without the powerful influence of religion on their cultures. Remarkably, the secularist narrative defied the ways that seminal liberal thinkers actually talked about religion. I will illustrate this by looking at the thought of Jean Jacques Rousseau, whose ideas undoubtedly had a major impact in shaping liberal Europe. He insisted that religion play a crucial role in the new societies they heralded. It was not precisely the religion of the day, however, but a new religion he saw coming along with the new liberal societies. Perhaps for that reason, some of his followers took only the negative part of what he said about religion and forgot about the positive part. This is an important observation, because the place of religion in society today may necessitate a rethinking of the assumptions of the past. We might well ask whether an accommodation of religion is essential for the health of liberal societies in the new Europe and indeed in the global twenty-first century, and what Rousseau's insights might contribute to such a new accommodation. Contemporary critics of Rousseau have called attention to his egotism, his criminal neglect of his five children, his misanthropic behavior toward women, his betrayal of friends like Hume, Grimm, and hosts like Madame de Warens, and his paranoia over an international conspiracy to silence him.2 Yet his brilliance as a writer and the massive impact of his thought on the modern mind are undeniable. His influence is perhaps greatest on political philosophy with his Social Contract and Second Discourse. His widely read Emile not only shaped educational theory but played a role in the development of Romanticism. When it comes to religion and Rousseau, his thought is hard to sort out. On one hand, he is bitterly critical of the Church, of priests, of dogma. On the other, he shows a great religious sensibility when speaking of a kind of fundamental religious sentiment basic to human nature, which he calls by different names: at times, \"the religion of nature;\" at other times, \"true religion\" or \"the religion of man.\" He defends religion against its naturalist critics, the skeptics, and the atheists like Voltaire. Most importantly for our purposes, he insists on the role of religion in civil society. THE SOCIAL CONTRACT \"Man is born free yet everywhere he is in chains.\"3 So Rousseau 2 See for example, Paul Johnson, Intellectuals (New York: Harper & Row, 1988), pp. 1-27; J.H. Huizinga, The Making of a Saint: The Tragi-Comedy of Jean-Jacques Rousseau (London: Harnish Hamilton, 1976). 3 The Social Contract, Book 1, Ch. 1. , p. 1 in Cress, English translation by Donald Cress (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1987) based on Oeuvres Completes de Jean-Jacques Rousseau, vol. III (Paris: Pleiade, 1964). Rousseau's \"Civil Religion\" Reconsidered 317 began his most famous work on politics, The Social Contract. Men are in chains, for they have alienated their freedom. Such a renunciation is incompatible with man's nature. How could persons form associations for their defense in which the individual remained free? By putting themselves under the supreme direction of the general will. In our corporate capacity, each member is an indivisible part of the whole. This corporation is the city, the republic, the body politic, the state, the sovereign, the power. Those associated with it are the people, citizens, subjects. What role does religion play in all of this? Rousseau deals with this in Book 4 of The Social Contract with his own version of the history of religions, reflecting the encyclopedist bent of his age and, indeed, the method to which Rousseau returned repeatedly in his writings. Throughout his life, Rousseau was a storyteller, a lyrical composer of opera and poetry, a novelist, and only then a political writer. Unlike a Guissepe Mazzini, who lived for political struggle and intrigue, Rousseau said he was not cut out for such strife and claimed with some sincerity that he was only thrust into politics after his essay that became his First Discourse won a prize and gained him the public eye. One is tempted to think that if he were alive today, he would be living in Hollywood making movies. Like any good storyteller, he begins his stories, \"Once upon a time....\" That \"time\" is a mythical past he imagines. Although his works contain references to current scientific discoveries, he is most interested in stories about first peoples, like the Carib Indians, who opened a window into pre-historic life. His Savage is indeed a Noble Savage, one who shares many traits with other animals save one: humans contain an irrepressible urge to improve: \"perfectibility.\" That urge can lead to the development of good things like language, agriculture, and the family. But it also can subject humans to the risk of going astray and of losing the original freedom and equalities given them by nature and subjecting themselves, often unwittingly, to bondage. In his Second Discourse, entitled Discourse on the Origin and the Foundations of Inequality among Men, he tells the tale of how inequality came to be. As a bard setting the scene for the first act, he begins with an invocation: Oh man, whatever land you may be from, whatever may be your opinions, listen. Here is your history such as I believe I read, not in the books by your kind, who are liars, but in nature, which never lies. Everything that will come from it will be true. Nothing will be false but what I will unintentionally have introduced of my own. The times of which I speak are very remote. How much you have changed from what you were! It is, so to speak, the life of your species that I've described to you in the terms of the 318 John Farina quality you received, which your education and your habits can deprave, but which they could not destroy.4 This is a mythical age of innocence now lost, a pure source, nature, which has tragically been lost. Rousseau's language evokes the fundamental creation myth of the West, shared by all the Abrahamic faiths. The prophetic quality of his work is sustained throughout as he talks of innocence lost with hints that a pure, perfectible nature, not thoroughly effaced by civil society, still exists in each of us. Rousseau, the former seminarian who left his native Geneva and for a time converted to Catholicism while living in Turino, never denounces religion. Rather, his work consistently shows a spiritual sensitivity that blends easily with his artistic and moralizing bent. The Fall, according to Rousseau, occurred when, after man had developed language and had begun to cluster in communities, someone one day claimed that part of the land was his. This birth of private property was the root of inequality: \"How many crimes, wars, murders; how much misery and horror mankind would have been spared if someone had pulled up the stakes and filled in the ditch and cried out to his fellows: \"Beware of listening to this imposter; you are lost if you forget that the fruits of the earth are everyone's and the Earth itself is no one's.\"5 \"Lost,\" because people had become enervated by the conveniences of civil society and had given themselves over to leisure. The things they once welcomed as improvements came to be required as necessities. Not having them produced more unhappiness than having them produced pleasure. People became aware of what others possessed and this necessitated that they control their amour propre. But most persons could not do so. To acquire more things, some relied on violence or deceit. The bourgeoisie became increasingly identified by what they had, not by what they were. Civility became an obligation and brought with it numerous occasions for offense. In their alienation and weakness, men ran to the protection of civil society and gladly gave their masters more power over them in the mistaken belief that it would advance their peace and security. The final phase of this decline is the complete distortion of the social order. \"The times preceding this last change would be times of troubles and calamities. But in the end everything would be swallowed up by the 4 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Second Discourse. Discourse on the Origin and the Foundations of Inequality among Men (1754). In Rousseau: The Discourses and Other Early Political Writings, Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought, Victor Gourevitch, ed. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 133:7, p. 133. All quotations to the Second Discourse are from this edition. 5 Par. 164, p. 161. Rousseau's \"Civil Religion\" Reconsidered 319 monster, and peoples would no longer have chiefs or laws but only tyrants.\"6 RELIGION IN CIVIL SOCIETY What role did religion play in the society brought about by amour proper? To explain this, Rousseau crafts another mythical history, this time of religion. At first, men had no kings save the gods. There were as many gods as peoples. But after a long time, men made other men their masters. National divisions led to polytheism. And this in turn gave rise to theological and civil intolerance, which Rousseau thinks were the same. When each state had its own cult, there were no wars of religion, because there was no distinction between its gods and its laws. The provinces of the gods were, so to speak, fixed by the boundaries of the nations. The gods of the pagans were not jealous gods; they shared the dominion of the world.7 In those times, there were no proselytizing or converting peoples. You had to conquer them. The Romans allowed the vanquished their gods, but required they worship Roman gods as well. Polytheism and paganism thus became a universal religion. However, the Jews refused to recognize the gods of their conquerors. This principle was the origin of religious war. Then Jesus changed things. He set up a spiritual kingdom separating temporal and spiritual powers. This made the state no longer sovereign. As a result, Rome never fully trusted Christians, regarding them as rebels whose obedience was feigned. Christians then took power, and everything changed. \"The humble Christians changed their language and saw the socalled Kingdom of the other world turned, under a visible leader, into the most violent of earthly despotisms.\"8 The result was a conflict whether to obey the priest or Caesar. That made all good polity impossible in Christian states. Several people tried to restore the old system. The Kings of England tried to remedy this by becoming heads of the church. But the title made them more the conservatives of Christianity than its rulers. Thomas Hobbes tried to remedy this problem but, Rousseau thought, should have seen that Christian insistence on sovereign spiritual power is incompatible with his system. Christianity does more harm by weakening than good by strengthening the state. There are three types of religions for Rousseau: the Religion of Man; the Religion of Citizens, and the Religion of the Priest.9 6 Par. 191, p. 185. 7 The Social Contract, Book IV, Ch. VIII, p. 96 in Cress. 8 Ibid., p.98 in Cress. 9 Ibid., pp. 98-103 in Cress. 320 John Farina The Religion of Man Here there are no temples or altars. Its truth is the religion of the Gospel pure and simple. It is nature. It is the divine right of law. The Religion of Citizens This religion is a codified system. It is a national entity, with a visible cultic head. It treats all outsiders as infidels and barbarians, which, for Rousseau, amount to the same thing. The Religion of the Priest This system gives persons two loyalties. It is premised on the idea that there exist two societies, one heavenly, the other earthly. It creates in its followers contradictory obligations and, as such, is an antisocial concept. The best examples are Roman Catholicism and Buddhism. The Religion of the Priest is worthless and bad for society. The Religion of the Citizens is good, in that it unites civil law and cult as a form of theocracy. But it is bad, because it is founded on lies, error, and superstitions. The Religion of Man, however, is good both for the society and the individual. It teaches the individual virtue, an indispensible trait for citizens in free societies. It is compatible both with individual freedom and with the claims of society. What is the Religion of Man? For Rousseau, it is what he calls \"Christianity,\" but by this he means not the Christianity of his day, but that of the Gospels. At times he uses \"Christianity\" to refer to the Religion of the Priest, but most often he reserves the term for the pure teachings of Jesus, before his followers perverted them into a repressive system. This \"Christianity\" is the \"holy, sublime, real religion of all men.\" It recognizes we are all the children of God and members of the common society that endures even beyond death. But this religion has no relation to a civil law that takes men's minds off of earthly things. It is not contrary to the social spirit. Rousseau contrasts this with a society of Christians following the Religion of the Priest. The society of such Christians would be other-worldly and would disregard temporal welfare. Rousseau disliked this \"Christianity\" and saw it as too susceptible to manipulation and to usurpation of freedom in the name of God. It preached \"only servitude and attendance.\" \"True Christians are made to be slaves and they know it and do not mind much.\"10 Rousseau goes on to justify the dominion of the state over religion. Citizens owe their sovereign an account of their actions only to the extent that those actions matter to the community. But religion matters very much 10 Ibid., p. 101 in Cress. Rousseau's \"Civil Religion\" Reconsidered 321 to the community, insofar as its dogmas teach morality and social duties. Therefore, the sovereign is justified in fixing the articles of a purely civil profession of faith without which a man cannot be a good citizen. The sovereign cannot compel belief in those articles, but can punish anyone who publically endorses antisocial behavior and impiety. \"If anyone, after publicly recognizing these dogmas, behaves as if he does not believe them, let them be punished by death.\"11 The dogmas of civil religion ought to be few, simple, and exactly worded: The existence of a mighty, intelligent divinity. The life to come. The happiness of the just. The punishment of the wicked. The social contract of the law. The proscription of intolerance of religious difference. \"Tolerance should be given to all religions that tolerate others, so long as their doctrines contain nothing contrary to the duties of citizenship.\" 12 This toleration did not extend to atheists, however, who had no right to publically practice their atheism.13 Rousseau's denunciation of the Religion of the Priest was used by some liberals to justify destroying the church and ignoring the rights of religious people. While sometimes difficult, it is necessary to distinguish Rousseau's vehement denunciations from his positive affirmations about the Religion of Man. One might criticize Rousseau's Religion of Man as the creation of the state, one that is nothing more than an archetype of the social. Rousseau's insistence that religious citizens should not be able to call upon a higher power is crucial and argues for the triumph of the state, through the mechanism of the general will, over religious freedom. A religion thus restricted is a civil religion, stripped of its appeal to transcendence, unless that transcendence is purely a horizontal transcendence that represents society as a whole, rather than a vertical transcendence that implies the existence of an order outside of the control of the state. Yet the vertical transcendence in Rousseau's Religion of Man may be supplied by his conception of nature and the liberty that comes from nature. The state's ability to dominate the Religion of Man may be limited by that transcendence. The Religion of Man may be re-examined and Rousseau's conception of the place of religion in society modified by seeing it in the 11 Ibid. p. 102 in Cress. 12 Ibid. 13 Rousseau's distrust of atheists as immoral and hence not due the solicitude of the state was shared by the author of the famous Letter on Toleration,\" John Locke. 322 John Farina context of his broader discussion of religion. A key to this is Rousseau's \"Profession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar\" in Emile, published in 1762, the same year as The Social Contract. By way of illustrating how to educate the young Emile, Rousseau tells the story of how, some thirty years in the past, a \"young expatriate\" found himself in an Italian city, reduced to poverty. After several pages, Rousseau reveals that he is speaking autobiographically about his days in Torino, where he sought asylum in a Catholic house and converted to Catholicism, only to soon flee and question his conversion. He then met a simple priest, whom he calls the Vicar of Savoyard, who took him into his home and looked after him with great solicitude and gentleness. After many days observing the priest's sincerity and holiness, the young lad asks him the secret to his happiness. The response is a long discourse by the Vicar on his faith, which outlines what the Vicar calls \"natural religion.\" Natural religion is a rejection of skepticism, for it can be known by man, and in fact is known to man by way of his reason and his experience of the world and of himself. There is no question about God's existence; in fact, God is \"the only absolute being, the only one that is truly active, sensing, thinking, willing by itself, and from which we get thought, sentiment, activity, will, freedom, and being.\"14 Freedom has its ultimate source in God, for we are free only because God wills it. Some contemporary scholars have argued that Rousseau himself was more the skeptic than the Savoyard Vicar.15 The problem with such comments is that they interpret \"skepticism\" differently than Rousseau does in the \"Profession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar.\" The Vicar says specifically he is not a skeptic, by which he means that the existence of God can be known by reason, without the aid of supernatural revelation. He praises English theologian Samuel Clarke's 1732 edition of Being and Attributes of God, and the Obligations of Natural Reason, and the Truth and Certainty of the Christian Revelation, in Opposition to Hobbes, Spinoza, and the Author of the Oracles of Reason, and Other Deniers of Natural and Revealed Religion. Clarke's book is a specific refutation of skepticism and naturalism. It adds the standard Christian claim that revelation provides what reason cannot; in Thomistic language, grace supposes and perfects nature and makes known to us the verities of the Christian faith. Rousseau's Vicar stops short of this, and that was one of the reasons Emile was condemned by both Catholics in Paris and Protestants in Geneva. The Vicar and Rousseau are \"skeptical\" about some peculiar doctrines of Christianity that seem to confound reason, but not skeptical 14 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Emile: Or On Education, in The Collected Writings of Rousseau, vol. 13, trans. and ed. by Christopher Kelly and Allan Bloom (Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 2010), p. 447. All quotations from Emile are from this volume. 15 See, for example, Christopher Kelly's \"Introduction,\" where he claims Rousseau himself was more the skeptic than the Savoyard Vicar, Ibid. xv-xxxi. Rousseau's \"Civil Religion\" Reconsidered 323 about the essential elements of Christianity, nor of the spiritual nature of God and the soul. Rousseau makes this even more specific in his response to Beaumont, published in 1763. The profession of faith of the Vicar, he says, has two parts: the first and most important is \"intended to combat modern materialism, to establish the existence of God and natural Religion with all the force of which the Author is capable.\"16 The second part, less important by Rousseau's account, \"raises doubts and difficulties about revelations in general.\"17 The skepticism of the Vicar is involuntary, because it stems from the limits of reason. With regard to those doctrines that defy reason, the Vicar \"respects them in silence without either understanding or rejecting them, and humbles himself before the great Being who alone knows the truth.\"18 The practical effect of this is not apostasy, but \"to make each more circumspect from within his own Religion about accusing others of bad faith from theirs.\"19 The nature-grace issue and its implications for his ideas about religion and civil society are further elucidated in the exchange with the Archbishop of Paris, Christophe de Beaumont, which we have been sampling. In his 1762 condemnation of Emile, Beaumont cast Rousseau as a false prophet, just the kind against which St. Paul warned. The \"frivolous\" style of Rousseau is a guise behind which hides a confused mix of \"great truth with great errors.\" None of this is innocent or sincere in the Archbishop's eyes, but sinister and typical of an age of growing disbelief and sensuality. When Beaumont leaves aside the ad hominems, he focuses on the issue of nature and grace, which indeed is at the heart of Rousseau's novel view of education. Beaumont takes issue with Rousseau's claim that \"there is no original perversity in the human heart.\"20 Rousseau's long response to Beaumont illustrates just what he thought about this claim that he was a naturalist and an enemy of Christianity. For Rousseau and many of the Christian Romantics he inspired, the rethinking of traditional notions of original sin did not represent an apostasy but an embrace of a more progressive view of human nature's perfectibility. He is genuinely disturbed that Beaumont questions his faith and even suggests that were Beaumont a peer, he would take him to court and accuse him of slander. All the histrionics aside, he is particularly disturbed because he sees himself as a defender of faith in the face of the naturalists and 16 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Citizen of Geneva, to Christophe de Beaumont, Archbishop of Paris, Duke of St. Cloud, Peer of France, Commander of the Order of the Holy Spirit, Patron of the Sorbonne, etc. (Amsterdam: Marc Michael Ray, 1763) in Christophe Kelly and Eve Grace, eds. The Collected Writings of Rousseau, Vol. 9 (Hanover: University Press of New England, 2001), p. 75. 17 Ibid. 18 Ibid., p. 74. 19 Ibid., p. 75. 20 Ibid, p. 4. 324 John Farina atheists like Spinoza, who deny the existence of the soul and of God. Rousseau then turns to his main critique of Beaumont's indictment of his educational philosophy on the basis of original sin. 21 Rousseau admits that he substitutes a doctrine of original goodness for Augustine's concept of original sin. But he rejects Beaumont's assertions that this is unquestionably outside the pale of Christian theology. As he shows in his Second Discourse and in his Social Contract, man undoubtedly becomes evil. On that much he and Beaumont agree. Rousseau questions just how useful the doctrine of original sin is, if it does not explain how persons become bad, once they are cleansed of the taint of original sin through Baptism. Even if the effects of original sin linger, that does not explain the psychological and social mechanisms by which persons become inclined to vice. It merely states that persons sin because they are sinners; and they are sinners because they are persons. That is just not satisfying to Rousseau. He has a much more detailed and, he thinks, compelling account of how this happens. In the state of nature before men come into close contact through civil society, the pure nature of persons remains unsullied. But as soon as they enter into society, they begin to observe one another and compare themselves to one another. The society soon develops preferences for certain traits. Persons experience the growth of amour proper, the vanity and self-consciousness that breeds envy, competition, and even violence.22 In Emile, Rousseau speaks of how to educate a child. Beaumont accuses him of a philosophy that allows the child to indulge his evil propensities. But for Rousseau, there is distinction between positive education and negative education. Positive education attempts to inculcate adult virtues in children. The problem is, however, that children are not ready for them. As a result, the virtues remain external, distorted, or embraced in less than authentic ways. The result is that the child learns vice rather than virtue. Negative education, by contrast, attempts only to prevent the child from being spoiled, rather than to inculcate particular virtues. It stresses developing a child's natural propensities, which, Rousseau believes, can then at a later age be used to embrace virtue. Negative education is far from idle. It protects against vice and prepares a child for everything that can lead him to the truth when he is capable of understanding it.23 Rousseau plainly considers himself a Christian and assumes Christian virtues as the basis for all good morality. He even suggests that he intended Emile to apply primarily to persons living in a state of grace after having received the sacrament of Baptism. His rejection of a certain understanding of the doctrine of original sin he describes this way: \"seeking to nourish my heart with the spirit of the Gospel without torturing my reason with what appears to me obscure in it: persuaded, finally, that whoever loves God 21 Ibid., p. 28. 22 Ibid., pp. 28-29. 23 Ibid., p. 35. Rousseau's \"Civil Religion\" Reconsidered 325 above all things and his neighbor as himself is a true Christian. I shall strive to be one, leaving aside all these doctrinal subtleties, all this important gibberish with which the Pharisees muddle our duties and obfuscate our faith; along with St. Paul placing faith itself beneath charity.\"24 By the time of the Letter to Beaumont, Rousseau had long since renounced Catholicism and returned to his native Calvinism in which he rejoiced, even though many of his fellow Genevans had their own troubles with Emile. He tells Beaumont that he was most fortunate to be born a Calvinist who takes Scripture and reason as the unique rules of faith. Like them, he challenges the authority of men and agrees to submit to them only to the extent he perceives their truth. It is very hard to see in Rousseau's language anything but the confessions of a person who struggles with faith, but who clearly embraces Christianity and strives to live according to its precepts. \"I join in my heart with the true servants of Jesus Christ and the true adorers of God, to offer him the homages of his Church in the communion of the faithful.\"25 These are not the words of one who denies the existence of God and the soul, not the words of a naturalist, but the words of a Christian humanist, intent on the perfectibility of human nature and on his own right to proclaim his understanding of faith in an original way. In that regard, Rousseau is a prototype for the faith of millions today who reject premodern understandings of religious authority that stifle inquiry in the name of orthodoxy. He does not reduce religion to his own sentiments, does not reject Scripture or tradition, does not shun Christian communion, does not question the existence of God or any of the essential doctrines of the faith. He simply cannot be seen as the model of an educational system that leaves out God or a civil society that rejects the role of religion. Nature, then, for Rousseau is a nature bathed in the divine and containing within itself God-given potential. Within it is a transcendent element that relativizes the secular. With regard to civil society, it functions as a check against the tyranny of the general will. That transcendent element prevents the general will from becoming, in the old joke about Rousseau's political theory, the General's will, a reference to Napoleon's distortion of the Rousseau-inspired French revolutionaries. Another way to speak about this is in terms of natural rights. Here we recall Leo Strauss' discussion of the importance of natural rights as a bulwark against tyranny. According to Strauss, modern democracies have rejected natural law, which is tantamount to saying that all life is positive right. This means that what is right is determined exclusively by the legislators and the courts. Only the will to power and ultimately nihilism remain in such a regime. Liberals sometimes welcome this abandonment of natural right as an expansion of individual freedom and toleration, because the society cannot 24 Ibid. p. 47. 25 Ibid. 326 John Farina determine what is intrinsically right or wrong. There is a tension between respect for diversity and recognition of natural right. Strauss insists that the basis for natural right must be non-teleological, rejecting the Catholic tradition of natural law that sees natural law as the subject's participation by reason in the divine law. On this point, Rousseau would differ, claiming that God is the basis of natural right.26 Although there remains a problem reconciling Rousseau's rhapsodic praises of the Religion of Man and nature with his insistence that the Religion of the Priest creates an untenable duality that society cannot allow, his thought, nevertheless, opens the possibility for seeing religion as vital to civil society. The \"Religion of Man,\" \"true religion,\" or \"natural religion,\" he thinks, should be acknowledged by society, because it provides the prepolitical basis of the values on which the legitimacy of the regime depends. God is the source of human freedom. As such, that freedom is never entirely subjugated to the general will in civil society. Despite the warrants some of Rousseau's famous disciples, like Marx and Pol Pot, found in his thinking to suppress religion in their societies, it appears that Rousseau himself offered a more nuanced view of the role of religion in civil society. Rousseau knew the power of religion to form solidarity and to shape social identity as well as personal identity. Religion shapes a deep personal identity that is by definition transcendent and social. Traditional notions of citizenship are based on exclusion. In some liberal states the Religion of Citizens has become the official religion of the state, what people like Robert Bellah call \"civil religion.\"27 All outsiders are in one sense nonbelievers, barbarians, the Other that must be excluded in some way. But as Levinas has shown us, the Other creates in us a responsibility to acknowledge the limits of our power over the Other.28 It challenges our act of exclusion. While Rousseau's Religion of the Priest and his Religion of Citizens define both the act of transcendence in their prescriptions and insistence on the experience of solidarity in their embodiment of public order, the face of the Other denies both claims. Rousseau's Religion of Man, by contrast, provides a basis for acknowledging in the Other what we experience in ourselves. George Mason University Washington DC, U.S.A jfarina@gmu.edu 26 Leo Strauss, Natural Right and History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953), pp. 2-7. 27 Robert Bellah, The Broken Covenant: American Civil Religion in a Time of Trial (New York: Seabury Press, 1975). 28 Emmanuel Levinas, Totalité et infini: essai sur l'extériorité (La Hayne: M. Nijhoff, 1961). CHAPTER XXV THE AUTHENTICITY OF THE HUMAN BEING IN CHRISTIAN EXISTENTIALISM AND PHENOMENOLOGY: S. KIERKEGAARD AND J. TISCHNER MAREK JAN PYTKO Abstract: What does it mean to be an authentic human being in the sense of S. Kierkegaard and J. Tischner? How do those ideas refer to the contemporary human condition, to the challenges one has to face in today's civilization? Why is it worthwhile to be an authentic human being? This paper addresses the importance and meaning of the problem of being authentic as a human being. Kierkegaard (a representative of Christian existentialism) formulates that problem as one of the most important in his whole work in confrontation with everyday life. He claims that: Man is a dialectical being that is in a concrete existence of eternity and finitude, time and eternity, possibility and necessity, a synthesis of soul (the hard nucleus), body and spirit, in short – the synthesis. One of the most fundamental, crucial determinants of human existence is \"time.\" This element is of key importance for the description of human existence, of whether a human being lives in an authentic or inauthentic way. In the horizon of \"past,\" \"present,\" and \"future,\" especially in the perspective of the future, the human being continuously transcends himself, becoming himself – or not. This is strictly related to eternity that encounters man at the moment of \"now.\" Every \"moment,\" every \"while,\" and their sum, and eventually the process of their sequence, or of human decision, always happen as related to eternity. The human being becomes authentic when, in this process of \"time\" and \"eternity\" coming together, he opens up and changes his life, and develops toward authentic existence. The human synthesis and dialectical character become more and more a unity, approaching harmony, completeness, or, in short – authentic existence. What is it that best determines one's authentic existence? It is his \"spirit\" and the necessity to decide upon choice. The human being must consciously choose a choice, decide to make decisions, always in the horizon of the present that is becoming eternity or its negation, which would be the perspective of inauthentic existence. Tischner (a phenomenologist) perceives the authenticity problem – which is one of the basic keys to understanding his philosophy – from a different angle. He claims that the problem of authenticity of the human being begins at the moment of encounter with another human being. The 328 Marek Jan Pytko encounter with another human being is more fundamental and original than the way man is with objects. The word \"face\" epitomizes the authenticity of the encounter and the truth of being – the truth that can be masked at the cost of hiding the \"face.\" Dialogue is necessary to discover the difference between mask and face, that is, between falsehood and the truth, illusion and authenticity. Tischner writes: \"The choice of one's own authenticity is the choice to 'be oneself' and the choice of everything that this 'being oneself' entails. If, however, 'being oneself' is an object of choice, it means that one is not oneself. A paradoxical situation – something is and is not at the same time. One can become 'oneself,' but one can also lose 'oneself.' Freedom is the possibility of doing either the former or the latter.\" The immediate sense of freedom is authenticity. Nothingness is a characteristic of freedom \"in itself.\" Another meaning of freedom, an erroneous meaning, is a depersonalized non-descriptness of a creature lost in the world. This is also a meaning, though a tragic one. We are ready to fight at barricades to expand the limits of our freedom, yet we have completely lost the sense of what authentic love (the highest level of authenticity) means. But there is no freedom without love, just as there is no love without freedom. In order to solve this problem Tischner compares two characters: Abraham and Adam. What does Adam do when God calls him by name? – He runs away and hides. What does Abraham do in an analogous situation? He says: \"Here I am, Lord!\" They show two different attitudes: Adam runs away to find a place on earth where he could hide from God. Abraham meets the challenge and says: \"Here I am.\" To a choice, Abraham responds with a choice, revealing the essence of the Biblical image of love. To love means to choose. Tischner says: \"God chooses, man responds to the choice, choosing God.\" What is the faculty that makes the choice? It is the human will. A bond called fidelity is also born here. What does it mean to be faithful? It means to carry within oneself the choice once made. To have decided once and forever means to make decisions every moment of one's life. Thus love means fidelity. Some conclusions: 1.The fundamental problem of the human being – which is also the problem of the contemporary person – is that of the human drama born of inauthentic existence. 2. The drama is particularly enhanced by mass media (aesthetic existence), which weakens the human ability to decide, \"stealing\" the human \"now,\" and – in consequence – depriving man of his identity and authenticity. 3. One of the main dramas of our times is considering love and fidelity as if they were fire and water. The fundamental schizophrenia of the contemporary person is the schizophrenia of fidelity. This leads to inauthentic existence and destruction of one's identity, to not being oneself. And so on. Keywords: authenticity, now, choice, man as a dramatic being, fidelity The Human Being in Existentialism and Phenomenology 329 Two great philosophers and theologians, living in different times, in a different epoch: SØren Kierkegaard (1813-1855, born in Copenhagen, Denmark) and Józef Tischner (1931-2000, born in Krakow, Poland), were thinkers who placed man and the values that constitute him, surround him, and define him, at the center of philosophizing. One of the key values in their philosophy was the authenticity of the human being. What does it mean to be authentic regardless of the passing time, changing fashions, and tides of events? What is this harbor that reveals the truth about man despite the changing times and cultures? What makes it fresh and radiant today, in the context of contemporary civilization, in the era of mass communication and globalization? Why is it still worthwhile to be an authentic person and to look for the essence of authenticity? These are the questions that I would like to answer by following, in your company, the thought of those two learned men who, although separated by time (about a century), language, and culture, were led – through the honesty of their approach to the questions of value, meaning, and the mystery of man – to the same essential issue: that of man's authenticity. In order to tackle this issue, first of all we have to answer the question: Who is man, according to Kierkegaard? What are man's characteristics? According to the Danish philosopher, man is a dialectical being that is a concrete existence of eternity and finiteness, time and eternity, possibility and necessity, a synthesis of soul, body, and spirit – in short, the synthesis. This definition of man confirms that, according to Kierkegaard, one of the fundamental and decisive determinants of the human existence is \"time.\" For him, as for many other existentialists, this factor is particularly important, as it constitutes the starting point for the description of the authentic or inauthentic mode of human existence. When analyzing the common understanding of \"time\" (\"past,\" \"present,\" and \"future\"), the philosopher claims that the future has a greater meaning than the two others, because existence is always a \"going by,\" a continuation of the way and a projection toward the future.1 Existence toward the future is meaningful for life and brings about its own self-restoration. This possibility is connected, in a particular way, to the perspective of \"eternity.\" Going even further, Kierkegaard observes that if we define time as \"infinite succession,\" it seems that in its very essence it contains definitions of present, past, and future. Actually, it is not so, because \"if, in the infinite succession of time, one could, in fact, find a foothold that would serve as a dividing point, then this division would be quite correct. But precisely because every moment, like the sum of the moments, is a process (a goingby), no moment is present, and in the same sense there is neither past nor present nor future.\"2 What, in fact, does the Danish philosopher say? Kierkegaard claims that eternity is the present! Eternity and time touch us 1 Cf. S. Kierkegaard, Concetto dell'Angoscia, a cura di C. Fabro (Milano: Opere, Sansoni Editor, 1993), p. 157. 2 Ibid., p. 154 (translated by MJP). 330 Marek Jan Pytko every moment and it is exactly in man that they find their privileged meeting point. Kierkegaard's is the concept of temporality, where time constantly cuts through eternity and eternity continually penetrates time.3 We are, however, interested in the question: What has this synthesis of time and eternity to do with the authenticity of the existence of man as an individual? The answer is: very much, as every human being is in the center of the process of the encounter of time and eternity. When man consciously opens up to this process of the encounter of time with eternity, when in his spirit he opens up to eternity, he changes his own life, gradually evolving toward authentic existence. Man as the synthesis and his dialectical character become a unity, increasing in harmony and fullness, and, in two words: authentic existence. In this perspective, Kierkegaard would say, the synthesis of time and eternity is not another synthesis, but an expression, according to which man is the synthesis of body and soul guided by the spirit. What is it then that in the existence of this individual determines his being authentic or inauthentic? Is it his spirit that must decide about choosing, or choose choosing (choice), and subsequently, along with the conscious act of choosing the choice, must choose what to choose? An individual human being, with his psychophysical structure, in the horizon of time and eternity, faces unlimited possibilities of choice. Theoretically, the number of possibilities is infinite; in practice, however, facing the decision, man must give preference to one of them. Each decision to choose contains, on one hand, a risk, and on the other hand, an opportunity, a chance, and its cost for man is, and must be, at least the consequence of his choice. The decisions made by man at every moment of his life may become increasingly \"his decision,\" and in this way, every moment of his life, he is offered the chance to become increasingly himself. In this sense, decision becomes the first factor of the challenge leading toward the authenticity of human existence. According to Kierkegaard, this results from the principle of combining \"possibility\" with \"necessity,\" with unceasing actualization of existence in temporality. Man must choose – but what is his main choice? It is the choice between good and evil, truth and falsehood. In consequence of these choices, man enters various stages of existence: aesthetic, ethical, religious, and Christian. Climbing this ladder, man does not always choose justly and correctly. It frequently happens that wishing to choose something better, he actually chooses worse. What are the consequences of such choices – or of the decision not to choose (typical acts of aesthetic existence). A man who flees from the necessity to make conscious and responsible decisions in his life initially experiences anxiety, next melancholy (sadness, depression), and in consequence gradually moves away from the authenticity of his own existence, which leads to degradation of the spirit and, in time, also of the body. Mozart's character Don Giovanni, with all his sexuality, is a typical example of this process. 3 Cf. Ibid., p. 156. The Human Being in Existentialism and Phenomenology 331 Conversely, man approaches the authenticity of his existence when he focuses on and takes up his own spiritual development without losing himself in the limitless drama of possibilities. This direction results from the process of actualization through which anxiety and melancholy can be overcome and eliminated. In such a process, and only through a true and authentic effort of existence, man can form absolutely, if he chooses his way of existence by rising to the challenge of living an ethical-religious life. Human life consists in continuously transcending oneself, and it is never given to man once and for all. This fact results simply from the human condition, and, in particular, from its temporality. Speaking about the inauthentic attitude toward oneself, Kierkegaard observes that it would be just a waste of time to struggle to become what one already is, that is, oneself; but this is exactly why the task is so very difficult, most difficult of all, because man (an individual) cannot just be himself as he must be constantly becoming. The most tragic state, that of despair, consists for Kierkegaard in the paradox of being unable to flee from oneself and, at the same time, to possess oneself – this is the extreme consequence of inauthentic existence. Despair is the destruction of the relationship of man with himself. In contrast, an authentic man strives to possess himself, or to become united with himself, never completely reaching this goal in time. As we have said, in the process of becoming, man actualizes himself at various stages. In this going-by, man can progress or move backwards, but making decisions to strive toward the highest dimension of religious existence, the Christian existence, man is lead to full existence. The outcomes of this evolution are, for Kierkegaard, closely related to another factor that strongly affects the authenticity of existence – or the absence of authenticity – and precipitates it in a particular way: it is repetition. What is repetition? Along with decision, it is another fundamental category of existence that builds up authenticity in a particular way. It is the way of recovering oneself anew. How, in what way? Repetition is, in a way, a synthesis of the memory of past experiences with what is potentially coming with a new existential situation. Repetition recalls in our memory the past, which, dominated by the fidelity to repetition, determines the sense of continuing to make appropriate, authentic choices, which unites and unifies man in himself. The unceasing continuation of repetitions makes fundamental and auto-affirmative choices complete themselves. Such repetitions, according to Kierkegaard, lead to living the true and authentic life. Such a person is not like a boy chasing butterflies, does not imbibe in the glory of the world, is not like an old woman sitting and spinning memories of the past, but in a quiet, concrete, and determined way strides toward the future. By repetition, man is able to collect his past to use it in his present situation. In this way, time may become a platform for his projects, may create a human \"continuum,\" where past actions anticipate actualization of the future. With repetition, man returns to himself, begins to live, becomes himself again, possesses himself. Repetition enables him to come back to himself from the 332 Marek Jan Pytko limitless drama of possibilities that may provoke the mentioned anxiety and melancholy of existence. With repetition, in Kierkegaard's vision, authenticity appears as an act of going-by, as rebirth and return to existence chosen in a deep way, akin to artistic or religious creation. Existence and the process of becoming always need something more than pure reflection on them. The authenticity of existence cannot be adopted only by thought – on the contrary, by virtue of the very definition of existence, openness, choice, creating projects, and accepting responsibility for one's own life would result in the full existence of the subject. Therefore, one element is still needed: it is determination, or the passion of commitment, which – along with reflection, repetition, decision, and action – is an element of inner completion, the factor that comes from within the subject.4 Why is it so important for living the fullness of authentic existence? With passion \"man cuts himself off from mere possibilities and identifies with thought in order to exist in himself.\" 5 \"Passion is the continuation of the moment that at the same time takes on movement and is its impulse.\" 6 With passion, uniting all his strength and psychophysical powers, man discovers new energies of life that make it easier for him to reach various mountaintops, to achieve what he desires. Passion so understood is the motor of all human existence; it supports man's determination and makes the process of his perfection faster and more precise. Obviously, we do not mean here the world's passion, by which an individual engages in an absolute relationship with the relative, which may lead to vanity, cunning, jealousy, etc. 7 No, that type of passion does not let the authenticity of human existence grow; on the contrary, it weakens and belittles it. There is, however, a different type of passion that leads toward moral and spiritual values. The image of this challenge (this direction) is Socrates, so often quoted by Kierkegaard. Socrates, with an admirable passion and being exceptionally honest toward himself and others, never stopped in his efforts to find the truth and authentic existence. With an extraordinary passion, knowing no compromise, he preferred more difficult and risky decisions to becoming unfaithful to what he believed in and what was the object of his deepest devotion. There is, however, along with this passion, a passion of a higher nature – the passion that, according to Kierkegaard, is related to faith and gives the authenticity of existence an even higher and stronger impulse. Yes, the existence of a believer is even more passionate and ardent than the Socratic one. That is so because existence combined with the paradox of faith yields from itself the maximum passion.8 With the knowledge of God in a 4 Cf. S. Kierkegaard, Postilla conclusiva non scientifica, a cura di C. Fabro (Milano: Sansoni Editor, 1993), p. 327. 5 Ibid., p. 445 (translated by MJP). 6 Ibid., p. 430 (translated by MJP). 7 Cf. Ibid., p. 492. 8 Cf. Ibid., p. 454. The Human Being in Existentialism and Phenomenology 333 personal relationship, this passion can lead man to the highest levels of existence. In it, man confronts in the deepest way all the elements of tension and contradictions coming from his nature. Here man, as an individual, experiences in an extreme way that he really is the embodiment of infinity and finiteness, a synthesis of soul, body, and spirit. In such a limitless passion, the subject is ready for the greatest things, including the sacrifice of himself, because he has a lot to win and a lot to lose. The price is immense: not only eternal life, but above all, eternal salvation. Therefore, the passion that refers to eternity strives to be taken on from within, without jealousy, envy, or the lack of hope. This passion does not want to manifest itself in a polemic as something important for existence, because it could lose its intensity.9 Kierkegaard speaks about the necessity of possessing this passion when he interprets the famous parable of five wise and five foolish virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom (Mt 25:1-12). The foolish virgins, says Kierkegaard, went to a shop to buy new oil for their lamps, having previously forgotten about the oil that should have been an expression of their preparedness and infinite passion in their desire to meet the Bridegroom any moment.10 To lose oil means, according to the Danish thinker, to lose the infinite passion, to be unable to see the truth of authentic existence understood as the time of being in love and as an attitude of lively enthusiasm for the Bridegroom. This passion is, for Kierkegaard, the highest and the greatest one. Thus, in Kierkegaard's thought, the most important elements of authenticity, which is the fundamental challenge of human existence, may betraced back to three: decision, repetition, and passion. From the lowest level of existence, which would be the stage of aesthetic existence, to its highest level, which is the Christian existence, man experiences one of the greatest challenges of his life: the authenticity of his existence. In order to respond to it, man needs to know himself, to become himself, but along with this, it is also necessary to open up – with commitment and passion – toward relationships with others. In particular, man can reach the fullness of existence thanks to the openness toward and the constant relationship with eternity, with God-Man. Kierkegaard says that \"I\" becomes completely transparent, that is, authentic, only in God.11 Józef Tischner (phenomenologist) – with whom the problem of authenticity is also one of the main elements necessary to understand his philosophy – approaches this issue from a slightly different angle. In order to grasp it, one must ask an analogous question: How does Tischner see Man? Who is Man? What reveals the authentic, or inauthentic, truth of his existence? Taking Hegel as his starting point, Tischner says that \"the person is a being 'for himself.' Man was given a task for himself. His life is his 9 Cf. Ibid., p. 488. 10 Cf. Ibid., p. 269. 11 Cf. S. Kierkegaard, La malattia mortale, a cura di C. Fabro, (Milano: Opere, Sansoni Editore, 1993), p. 634. 334 Marek Jan Pytko becoming. Therefore, like no other being he can be, per se, 'through himself.' Man responds to the call of values, and in this way not only does he transform the world, but he also creates himself as value in this world. In Man value has become person.\"12 What values in relation to the person has Tischner in mind here? In order to solve this problem, we must start with the fundamental claim made by Tischner. He asserts that man is a dramatic being. What does it mean that man is a dramatic being? It means that he partakes in a drama. It is in the drama and through the drama that man reveals who he really is. \"To be a dramatic being means to live through a given time surrounded by other people and with the earth as the stage under one's feet. Man would not be in a dramatic existence without those three factors: openness to the other man, openness to the stage of the drama, and openness to the passing time.\"13 Let us begin with the concept of time, which for Tischner, as for Kierkegaard, plays an important role, although its meaning is different. For Tischner, time means dramatic time, different than the objective time known from natural sciences: the time of physical and chemical processes. However, \"it is the time that is happening between us as participants of one and the same drama. (...) It is not – strictly speaking – within me or within you, but just between us. It has its own logic – proper only to itself – that governs its continuity and irreversibility. (...) Under our feet there is our world – the stage of the drama. We walk on it, see it and hear it, touch it with our hands. Representations of the stage may be different. For Aristotle, the stage is the totality of existing things, of substances; for George Berkeley, it is a representation common for human beings, a dream induced in their souls by God himself. But for people involved in living through the drama, the stage of life is primarily the plane of meetings and partings.\"14 The real drama of man begins the very moment a human being meets another human being, which may lead to their parting. The stage and space are the background for the drama, the background against which Tischner distinguishes two relationships: the relationship of man with other man and the relationship of man with the world that is the stage of his drama. The relationship with other man is that of mutual responsibility, of the most profoundly understood dialogue, whereas the relationship of man to the stage is an intentional relationship – one of objectification. It may happen that not only does man commit an error, but he may also consciously take the other for the stage, and the stage for the other. In both cases the person is reduced to the role of an object. Tischner calls it an ontological illusion. 12 J. Tischner, Etyka wartości i nadziei, in: Wobec wartości, joint work, D. von Hildebrand, J.A. Kłoczowski, J. Paściak and J. Tischner (Poznań, 1982), p. 86 (translated by MJP). 13 J. Tischner, Filozofia dramatu (Kraków: Znak, 2006), p. 5 (translated by MJP). 14 Ibid., p. 6 (translated by MJP). The Human Being in Existentialism and Phenomenology 335 We have said that the problem of the authenticity of man is revealed with a particular strength at the moment of one human being meeting the other. Such an encounter is of a fundamental character and it is more original than an encounter of man with objects. Following the erring ways of the encounters of man with the other, we can come close to – or move away from – the proper way that leads toward the authentic choice and authentic existence of man. In this perspective, man is capable of three kinds of erring ways: a) going astray in the element of beauty; b) going astray in the element of truth; c) going astray in the element of goodness. a) Going astray in the element of beauty: The beauty of objects, landscapes, and particularly of the other person, enchants and deludes. Beauty transports, elates, enraptures, but may also mislead, tempt, and deceive. Sometimes beauty may lead to cruelty when the enchanted is driven to insanity.15 Beauty is lyrical and musical – that is why it is so easy to surrender to it, let oneself be taken to heaven, and sometimes go seriously astray. It is so fragile, and this very fragility forebodes tragedy, the more so that it is not bound to fidelity.16 Tischner says that beauty – like in Kierkegaard – \"is not a dead appearance of an object, but the light that gives life and takes life, the flame that gives warmth but also burns, and it is the value with which the drama of man starts. The point of this drama is not 'to be enraptured or not to be enraptured,' but to save oneself or to perish.\"17 Thus the end may be tragic; beauty may be substituted for goodness. b) Going astray in the element of truth: Two examples show the relationship of man to truth and its twofold consequences. The first is the apology of Socrates, who defends himself from mendacious accusations, the second – the defense of Raskolnikov, from Fyodor Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment, who commits murder, is detained, and is interrogated. For the former, truth is the way of saving life, for the latter – the way of saving life is the lie. The former tells the truth, although he is accused of lies, the latter tells lies presenting falsehood as truth. \"Presenting falsehood as truth, the liar strives for consolidating falsehood in the thus created system of illusions. It is not illusion that stands at the origin of the falsehood of speech, but the falsehood of speech stands at the origin of illusion.\"18 Who is the true killer and who perishes, who is the ultimate victim? The liar! As the consequence of killing the truth that previously lived in him, he kills himself spiritually, from within. As a result, his existence becomes particularly inauthentic. 15 Cf. Ibid., p. 91. 16 Cf. Ibid., p. 95. 17 Ibid., p. 94 (translated by MJP). 18 Ibid., p. 105 (translated by MJP). 336 Marek Jan Pytko c) Going astray in the element of goodness: The central interest of the philosophy of drama is the experience of the other human being which, as Emanuel Levinas will say (Tischner observes), is originally given through the experience of his face. Objects are given to us through their appearance, while man is given through the face. A revelation of the face is always a revelation of the truth of the other person. The experience of the face has an ethical character. The face of the other is the face of a foreigner, a widow, or an orphan, says Tischner, referring to the Bible. The face is given to us with this person's misery – that of a foreigner who, in a country that is not his own, asks the way; of a widow who has lost her husband; of an orphan who has lost his parents. They all feel that in some way they are strangers in this world. Like them, every man, claims Tischner, is constantly exposed to the danger of humiliation, contempt, death. Therefore, the face – that is naked – continually says: You will not kill, you will not commit murder! You will not kill me physically or spiritually; you will not make me physically lose my freedom; you will not betray me! Therefore, the fundamental experience of man is agathological19. In the word \"face,\" the authenticity of the encounter with the other and with the truth of one's own being is established. This truth may be masked at the cost of hiding the \"face.\" Man is man not only because he builds cities, roads, and creates technology and metaphysics, but because he is a creature capable of understanding the good and of experiencing the good, in relation to other men. If he becomes being-for-others, in consequence he also becomes being-for-himself, becomes himself. He needs to open to others, to enter a dialogue with them in order to discover the difference between the mask and the face, falsehood and truth, illusion and the authenticity of his own face. And here man is a dynamic being, not in the biological, but in the spiritual sense. Therefore, man constitutes himself in the horizon of good and evil, values and anti-values, becoming an authentic or inauthentic being. Man himself plays the most important role in this drama, at its very foundation, building up or degrading himself. In all three kinds of going astray, the human being becomes himself only when he has first been a man of dialogue and becomes a responsible actor in his own drama – this is exactly the moment when he becomes authentic. For Tischner, as for Kierkegaard, one cannot say that man \"is,\" but that he is constantly becoming – man is process. Freedom is a particular value for Tischner in the perspective of the authenticity of the human being. Tischner analyzes it under two classical aspects of the Hegelian theory of contraries: \"freedom from\" and \"freedom to.\" \"Freedom from\" is the human capacity and power to say \"no,\" it is human rebellion against the past or the future. A protester always protests in the name of a hope, which is also related to a risk. \"Freedom to\" is directed toward something, toward a value. But \"freedom to\" is also a form of creativity, inner freedom, and ability of selfdetermination, thanks to which man creates himself from within. Man 19 Greek word \"AGATHON\" means goodness. The Human Being in Existentialism and Phenomenology 337 creates himself even when he is unable to create anything in the external world. Following Hegel, Tischner explains \"external freedom\" and \"internal freedom\" by describing the condition of a slave who has two ways out of his slavery: either to kill his master and free himself from oppression, or to accept slavery. None of these choices is really an act of freedom.20 The slave – that is, the man deprived of freedom – not only does not do what he wants, but he also is not the person he can and should be – actually, he IS NOT. Tischner says that the loss of freedom means falling into what Heidegger calls an inauthentic way of being. What act then would be the act of freedom? According to Hegel, the act of freedom is assuming the third attitude – rising above the contraries. Freedom does not consist in going to either to the right or to the left, but upward.21 True freedom consists in creating oneself anew, in surpassing the contraries in the dramatic situation. This way upward is an inner creation, a constitution of the \"thinking I.\" This Hegelian aspect of freedom as a value would determine Tischner's philosophical thought in this aspect. The essence of liberation lies in the experience contributed by Stoicism and Christianity. Both Stoics and Christians rose above the situations where slavery could exist – and actually did exist. As a matter of fact, without this inner experience, without this step upward, it is impossible, claims Tischner, to speak about authentic freedom. In sum, the proper expression of freedom is no longer man's choice of values that are in front of him, but also – and perhaps even in the first place – making the chosen values \"his own.\" Tischner writes: \"The choice of one's own authenticity is the choice to 'be oneself' and the choice of everything that this 'being oneself' entails. If, however, 'being oneself' is an object of choice, it means that one is not oneself. A paradoxical situation – something is and is not at the same time. One can become 'oneself,' but one can also lose 'oneself.' Freedom is the possibility of doing either the former or the latter.\" The immediate sense of freedom is authenticity. Nothingness is a characteristic of freedom \"in itself.\" Another meaning of freedom, though a tragic one, is a depersonalized nondescriptness of a creature lost in the world. There is still one more step to make. Along with beauty, goodness, and freedom, love is a value of particular importance for Tischner. In this context, it can be observed that we are ready to fight at barricades to expand the limits of our freedom, yet we have completely lost the sense of what authentic love (the highest level of authenticity) means. But there is no freedom without love, just as there is no love without freedom. In order to solve this problem, Tischner compares two characters: Abraham and Adam. What does Adam do when God calls him by name? He runs away and hides. What does Abraham do in an analogous situation? He says: \"Here I am, Lord!\" They show two different attitudes: Adam runs away to find a 20 Cf. J. Tischner, Filozofia dramatu, p. 154. 21 Cf. Ibid., p. 159. 338 Marek Jan Pytko place on earth where he could hide from God. Abraham meets the challenge and says: \"Here I am.\" To a choice, Abraham responds with a choice, revealing the essence of the Biblical image of love. To love means to choose. Tischner says: \"God chooses, man responds to the choice, choosing God.\" 22 What is the faculty that makes the choice? It is the human will. A bond called fidelity is also born here. What does it mean to be faithful? It means to carry within oneself the choice once made. A poet says: \"To have decided once and forever means to make decisions every moment of one's life.\"23 Thus love would mean fidelity, and fidelity is at the same time a condition of authenticity. To love truly means first of all to be truly authentic. CONCLUSION Why have I chosen these two philosophers for this study entitled \"Values of the Human Person|: Contemporary Challenges\"? I believe that the fundamental problem in contemporary culture, civilization, and mentality is the problem of man's being lost as an individual in the mass. This concerns not only man but also society; being lost, we suffer from the sickness of inauthentic existence. In mass pop-culture and the global sale of ideas, services, and products, we are given – as though on a plate (for breakfast, lunch, and dinner) – an ideal of life that usually leads to aesthetic existence – a chain of sensual pleasures, intellectual pride, power, the cult of money. Mass media, because it is, at the moment, the main channel through which we are provided with an infinite number of offers, does not teach what and how to choose in order to live deeply, consciously, and with passion. Instead, it involves man in a virtual existence, steals his \"now,\" softens his capacity for decision-making, and turns him into an object in the name of wrongly understood freedom. Then, man has no strength to change, to make Kierkegaard's \"repetition,\" and even if he succeeds in it, given four to five hours of watching television a day (not to mention other media), those \"repetitions\" often lead toward dehumanization, addictions, and the breaking up of one's identity, to the lack of being oneself. The chance to exit this loop is to come back to the roots, to what man is, where he comes from, where he is going, and what the meaning is of his being. Yet in order to change this, one must choose the choice, must want to be an authentic person – in the encounter with himself, others, and God. John Paul II Catholic University of Lublin Lublin, Poland mpytko@o2.pl 22 J. Tischner, Wiara ze słuchania (Kraków: Znak, 2009), p. 97 (translated by MJP). 23 Ibid., p. 97 (translated by MJP). CHAPTER XXVI THE VALUE OF THE HUMAN PERSON: RABINDRANATH TAGORE'S RELEVANCE TO THE CHALLENGES OF TODAY'S WORLD SEEMA BOSE Abstract: Rabindranath Tagore was a Bengali poet, and the first Asian to receive the Nobel Prize for Literature. 'Man' occupies a vital position in Tagore's thinking. Creation through art, poetry, music, dance, and philosophy all stem from what he calls \"the surplus in man.\" Creativity elevates man from a mere physical being to a complete man. In his capacity for creativity, man realizes the divine within himself. Tagore's love of nature and for natural beauty, cannot be overlooked. According to him, human personality cannot develop if there is a division between the human individual and nature or the world in general. In the human person nature becomes articulated, articulated in living. Love is the root of all relationships. Love is superior to knowledge. Fulfillment is achieved within interpersonal relationships in spite of pain, suffering, and death. At a time when violence plagues our world and when human beings are so often treated as tools in a world of objects, it is good to be reminded by Tagore that in reality our being is concrete, that is, not to be reduced to any kind of abstraction. Though people belong to different cultures, no one should be exploited at the cost of another. Tagore's great emphasis on the dignity of the human person needs to be remembered in the midst of our tendency to think in terms of globalizing powers, in relation to which we usually feel that we are helpless pawns. Keywords: Rabindranath Tagore, creativity, \"the surplus in man,\" humanism, multicultural education. Rabindranath Tagore was a Bengali poet, the first Asian to receive the Nobel Prize for Literature. The year 2011 being the one hundred fiftieth birth anniversary of Tagore, it is an appropriate time to pay tribute to the ideas of this great man and reassess their validity in the contemporary situation. Tagore was influenced by Chandidas, a Medieval poet. Chandidas said that there is nothing above man. \"...The truth of man is the highest truth, there is no other truth above it.\"1 Tagore writes, \"Man has a fund of emotional energy that is not all occupied with his self-preservation. This surplus seeks its outlet in the creation of Art, for man's civilization is built Diacritical marks have not been used. 1 Rabindranath Tagore, The Religion of Man (London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1958), p. 113. 340 Seema Bose upon this surplus.\"2 Creation through art, poetry, music, dance, and philosophy all stem from what he calls \"the surplus in man.\" Creativity and self-expression elevate man from a mere physical being to a complete man. In his capacity for creativity man realizes the divinity within himself. Personal development depends upon the realization of the innate potentiality of the self. Our endeavors should be directed toward the actualization of this potential. Art enriches our lives. Not only are music, painting, and drama sources of relaxation and enjoyment, they are equally important as academic disciplines. Keeping this in mind, Tagore included arts in the curriculum of Visva-Bharati in Santiniketan. Tagore encouraged teachers and pupils to have direct contact with the community around them, and emphasized community singing and community service. He believed that this would help in developing social sensibility. Tagore's ideas were based on his lived experience. In this connection, the Baul singers of his village had a great impact on him. Bauls did not follow any formality. Wandering from village to village they sang, danced, and rejoiced in everyday life. In tune with this spirit, Tagore discarded conventional religious beliefs and practices, believing that rigid religious beliefs and practices are obstacles to progress. For example, he found nothing wrong in a Brahmin girl marrying a Muslim boy. \"Eternal religion of heart is greater truth than society.\"3 Tagore said, \"I do not put my faith in institutions, but in the individuals all over the world who think clearly, feel nobly, and act rightly. They are the channel of moral truth.\"4 God is immanent in man and each individual man is sacred. This is perhaps the most important of the messages Tagore has for us. Tagore's love of nature and natural beauty must be stressed. Tagore once wrote, \"Don't arrange a meeting, if you want to remember me after my death, but come under the shades of the shal trees.\"5 Men and women are the creations of nature. In this connection, Tagore appreciated the work of Dadu. Like Dadu, he held the same idea of the formless seeking form and form seeking the formless. We have come from the infinite and we 2 Rabindranath Tagore, Personality (London: Macmillan and Co. Ltd., 1959), p. 11. 3As referred to in S.A. Masud, \"Tagore on Human Values,\" in Bhudeb Chaudhuri and K.G. Subramanyam (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore and the Challenges of Today (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1988), pp. 74-75. 4As referred to in Andrew Robinson, \"Introduction,\" in Rabindranath Tagore, My Reminiscences PAPERMAC (London and Basingstoke: a division of Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1991), p. 11. 5As referred to in Sisir Kumar Das , \"Keynote Address,\" in Bhudeb Chaudhuri and K.G. Subramanyam (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore and the Challenges of Today (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1988), p. 14. Rabindranath Tagore on the Value of the Human Person 341 must return to the infinite.6 Human personality cannot develop if there is a division between the human individual and nature or the world in general. \"If this world were taken away, our personality would lose all its content.\"7 In the human person, nature becomes articulate, articulate in living. Man, in knowing the world, knows himself. \"We should have the gift to be natural with nature and human with human society.\"8 Tagore was a close observer of nature and his surroundings. He always rejoiced in the rising of the sun, the chirping of the birds, the blossoming of flowers, the fall of leaves, the deep blue sky, and dark grey clouds. Using the metaphor of a tree, which draws food from its surroundings, Tagore felt that for healthy growth, a child should first study and love nature. He felt that a child must have personal experience of trees before he studied botany as a science. Science is, no doubt, useful, but scientific laws are man's creations. According to Tagore, love is the root of all relationships, binding us all. Love is superior to knowledge. Human existence is being-with-others. We are essential to one another. As Tagore puts it, \"that I become more in my union with others is not a simple fact of arithmetic. We have known that when different personalities combine in love, which is the complete union, then it is not like adding to the horse power of efficiency, but it is that what was imperfect finds its perfection in truth, and therefore in joy.\"9 \"Human society is the best expression of man, and that expression, according to its perfection, leads him to the full realization of the divine in humanity.\"10 Fulfillment is achieved in interpersonal relationships in spite of pain, suffering, and death. Tagore's own experience combined knowledge and action, work and joy. He wrote plays and acted in them, composing songs, which he sang, and danced with his students. In their enjoyment he experienced joy himself. Tagore emphasized that mankind must realize unity in diversity and established Visva-Bharati in Santiniketan with the hope that this University would help in achieving this goal. Tagore's Jana Gana Mana (Mind of the People, 1912), which became India's national anthem, emphasized India's 6As referred to in Margaret Chatterjee, \"Closing Remarks,\" in Bhudeb Chaudhuri and K.G. Subramanyam (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore and the Challenges of Today (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1988), p. 338. 7 Rabindranath Tagore, Personality (London: Macmillan and Co. Ltd., 1959), p. 14. 8 Rabindranath Tagore, \"A Poet's School,\" in Visva –Bharati and Its Institutions (Calcutta, 1961), p. 8. 9 Rabindranath Tagore, Personality (London: Macmillan, Pocket Tagore Edition, 1985), p. 83. 10 Rabindranath Tagore, Creative Unity (London: Macmillan, Pocket Tagore Edition, 1980), p. 23. 342 Seema Bose achievement in maintaining unity amid diversity. The true meaning of education lay in the discovery of the self. \"The first step toward that realization is revealing the different peoples to one another.... We must find some meeting ground where there can be no question of conflicting interest..... One such place is the university, where we can work together in a common pursuit of truth, share together our common heritage, and realize that artists in all parts of the world have created forms of beauty; scientists have discovered secrets of the universe; philosophers the problems of existence; saints made the truth of the spiritual organic in their own lives, not merely for some particular race to which they belonged but for all mankind.\"11 \"The spirit of democracy, of humanism, is Tagore's greatest contribution to multicultural education.\"12 He emphasized the need for harmony among all human races. Though people belong to different cultures, no one should be exploited at the cost of another. No one should be a victim of fear, oppression, exploitation, slavery, or superstition. Tagore wrote strongly against these evils in his poem Questions. Tagore stood for freedom and social justice as supreme human values. He even renounced Knighthood as a protest against the Jallianwalla Bagh massacre in 1919. Expressing himself as a humanist, he considered this as an insult to mankind. In his novel Gora, written in 1907, he emphasized universal humanism as above nationalism. At a time when violence plagues our world, and when human beings are so often regarded as tools in the objective world, it is good to be reminded by Tagore that our being is concrete, that is, not to be reduced to any kind of abstraction in a world of objects. In Sadhana, written in 1913, Tagore reiterated the philosophy of the wholeness of existence. Tagore observes, \"in modern society, the ideal of wholeness has lost its force.\"13 Tagore wrote to Andrews from New York, \"The complete man must never be sacrificed to the patriotic man, or even to the merely moral man. To me, humanity is rich and large and many-sided.\"14 \"What Tagore loved and 11 As referred to in David Kopf, \"The Bengali Prophet of Mass Genocide : Rabindranath Tagore and the Menace of Twentieth Century Nationalism,\" in Mary Lago and Ronald Warwick (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore : Perspectives in Time (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, London: The Macmillan Press Ltd., 1989), p. 61. 12 As referred to in Ranjana Ash, \"Introducing Tagore in Multicultural Education in Britain,\" in Mary Lago and Ronald Warwick (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore: Perspectives in Time (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, London: The Macmillan Press Ltd., 1989), p. 155. 13 As referred to in Sisir Kumar Das, \"Keynote Address,\" in Bhudeb Chaudhuri and K.G.Subramanyam (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore and the Challenges of Today (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1988), p. 21. 14 As referred to in Krishna Kripalani, Tagore – A Life, published by the author (New Delhi, Calcutta, Bombay, Madras: Orient Longman Ltd. As sole distributors, 1971), p. 168. Rabindranath Tagore on the Value of the Human Person 343 admired was the man in man, irrespective of his status in society, be the status common or uncommon, low or high.\"15 Realization of the \"mahamanav,\" or \"the superman,\" in every individual is an important facet of his philosophy in his book The Religion of Man. He was a man who loved human beings. He himself said: \"My heart is with the menders on the roadside, with the breakers of stone, with those who lay the bricks, and with those who fetch the water and the mud....\"16 Tagore's great emphasis on the dignity of the human person needs to be remembered in the midst of our tendency to think in terms of globalizing powers, in relation to which we tend to feel that we are helpless pawns. Bengali novels Nashtanir (The Broken Nest) and Chitrangada highlight the quality of self-determination in Tagore's female protagonists. Tagore noticed that the treatment meted out to women in the traditional Hindu household left a lot to be desired. While he conceded the fact that as mothers and wives, women achieved a high degree of satisfaction, this did not prevent him from realizing the loneliness that they so often experience. He felt its impact when his sister-in-law committed suicide. He was sensitive to the crisis of feminine identity. The heroine of Tagore's Strir Patra (A Wife's Letter, 1914) went on to say: \"In your joint family, I am known as the second daughter-in-law. All these years, as I stand alone by the sea, I know that I have another identity, which is my relationship with the universe and its creator. That gives me the courage to write this letter as myself, not as the second daughter-in-law of your family... I am not one to die easily. That is what I want to say in this letter.\" Tagore was no doubt a poet who championed the cause of women, insisting that men must restore the dignity and honor of women, both within and outside the home. Department of Philosophy University of New Delhi New Delhi, India seemabose2005@yahoo.co.in 15 Ibid., p. 250. 16 As referred to in Mulk Raj Anand, Tagore's Religion of Man: An Essay on Rabindranath Tagore's Humanism, in Bhudeb Chaudhuri and K.G. Subramanyam (eds.), Rabindranath Tagore and the Challenges of Today (Shimla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1988), p. 92.\n\nCHAPTER XXVII THE ACTING PERSON AND THE EXPERIENCE OF VERTICAL TRANSCENDENCE IN KAROL WOJTYLA'S WRITINGS WILHELM DANCĂ Abstract: This presentation is a critical consideration of the merits and limitations of the phenomenological analysis of the acting person, based on philosopher Karol Wojtyla's chief oeuvre, The Acting Person. Following a short introduction to Karol Wojtyla's methodology and anthropology, I will point out the peculiarity of his philosophical endeavor which, as it is well known, starts not from the ontological structure of person, but from human action as such, based on the intuition that the person is revealed in and through action. I will also show that, to be understood and explained adequately, the phenomenology of the experience of human acts requires a perspective capable of taking it beyond simple morphological description. Such a perspective may well manifest itself at the level of conscience, which The Acting Person examines from more than one viewpoint. In this presentation, I only examine the free acts of man, his decisions and choices, as related to the analysis of the fundamental experience of the \"I can, but am not constrained to do this,\" and to the presentation of the person as the effective cause of its own actions. Following Karol Wojtyla, I will attempt to bring together phenomenology and metaphysics, and to this end I will address the experience of the vertical transcendence of person, with a focus on the spiritual nature of person. In the end, the unity of the person's being relies on the spiritual being. As suppositum metaphysicum, the spirit constitutes the person's wealth and that of its acts. Keywords: Karol Wojtyla, acting person, vertical experience, transcendence, phenomenology of human action One of the reasons I decided to address this conference is the recent beatification of Pope John Paul II. The ensuing discussions and debates have brought to the fore the multiple facets of his personality, including the personalist character of his thinking, as evidenced by an analysis of a number of studies with a marked anthropological character, which he authored when he was the Bishop of Krakow and a professor of Philosophical Ethics. He wrote Love and Responsibility1 and The Acting 1 Cf. Karol Wojtyła, \"Amore e responsabilità. Morale sessuale e vita interpersonale\" in: Karol Wojtyła, Metafisica della persona. Tutte le opere 346 Wilhelm Dancă Person,2 as well his writings as Pope, particularly his encyclicals. I would like to draw special attention to the encyclicals Redemptor hominis, Veritatis splendor, and Fides et ratio. All of these studies show that Karol Wojtyla's personalism is deeply theocentric or theological; a fact which should not cause raised eyebrows among philosophers, because in the history of ideas, the understanding of man as person first appeared in Christianity, as a result of Conciliar and Patristic debates on the divine persons of the Holy Trinity. The approach and methodology of my presentation, as well as the meaning of the concept of person, lie at the confluence of faith and reason, or philosophy and theology. My presentation consists of (1) a synthesis of the roots of Wojtyla's personalism, followed by (2) a presentation of several dimensions of the person as revealed by the phenomenological analysis of the person in action, and finally, (3) a reading of one of these dimensions of the person in the framework of contemporary cultural challenges. THE ROOTS OF KAROL WOJTYLA'S PERSONALISM The foreword of the English Edition of The Acting Person, Wojtyla's chief philosophical oeuvre, contains a philosophical confession concerning his debt to Thomism and phenomenology: \"The author of the present study owes everything to the systems of metaphysics, of anthropology, and of Aristotelian-Thomistic ethics on one hand, and through Max Scheler's critique, also to Kant, on the other hand.\"3 The influence of Thomistic thinking first appeared in Wojtyla's reflections when he was an undergraduate pursuing a degree in theology in Krakow, only to become established later, during his doctoral studies in Rome, at the Angelicum University, where, on June 19, 1948, under the guidance of the Dominican Father Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange, the most influential Catholic theologian of the first half of the twentieth century, he defended his doctoral thesis on \"Faith According to Saint John of the Cross.\" From a philosophical viewpoint, Garrigou-Lagrange criticized the immanence of modern philosophy while upholding the perceived truth of gnoseological realism, arguing in favor of the intentional character and objectivity of human knowledge. According to Garrigou-Lagrange, when human intelligence steps out of itself, it does not encounter ideas, but things, or rather the things' existence. In supreme acts, humans have absolute preeminence, as argued by Saint Thomas Aquinas, for whom existence is an filosofiche e saggi integrativi (a cura di Giovanni Reale e Tadeusz Styczeń) (Milano: Editrice Bompiani, 2003), pp. 461-778. 2 Cf. Cardinal Karol Wojtyła, The Acting Person (translated from the Polish by Andrezej Potocki), (Dordrecht, Holland; Boston, U.S.A.; London, England: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1979). 3 Cardinal Karol Wojtyła, The Acting Person, p. xiv. Wojtyla'sActing Person and Vertical Transcendence 347 act, formal in the highest degree, absolute perfection, or maximal actuality. Wojtyla adopted such philosophical viewpoints in his doctoral thesis from his mentor; nevertheless, the starting point for his research was neither intelligence nor understanding, but the experience of faith. In a 1979 article, Wojtyla synthesized the humanism of Saint John of the Cross while emphasizing the empirical character of man's subjective supernaturalism. Here is the conclusion of this study: \"the supernatural sphere of man manifests itself as a super-subjective and, at the same time, superpsychological fact. With Saint John of the Cross, what we find compelling are not so much those reasonings which rely on an abstract view of man and his nature, but the concrete itself, which pulsates with supernatural life in its empirical development and becomes self-conscious in the context of experience.\"4 Therefore, it was from Saint John of the Cross and the Roman school of philosophy (Garrigou-Lagrange) in general that Wojtyla adopted a number of key philosophical notions, and he then returned to Poland with the conviction that the phenomenology of experience can shed light on the divine roots of man's mystery, and that the experience of faith with its accompanying mystical experience of the \"night\" and its emotional void, make the human person an unobjectifiable subject that can only find fulfillment in the transformation resulting from the interpersonal love of the communion with God as Person. By adopting this interpretation of man from Saint John of the Cross, Wojtyla saw humans as persons, that is, beings created in the image and likeness of God, intelligent beings endowed with spirituality, freedom, and subjective feelings – an \"imago Dei.\" In other words, both God and humans are persons. However, Saint Thomas Aquinas does not provide an adequate account of the way in which humans are persons. Such an account is made possible by the fact that humans are the only beings of which we have internal knowledge. The influence of Scheler on Wojtyla's thinking is debatable, for several reasons.5 First, Wojtyla's encounter with phenomenology was mediated by one of Edmund Husserl's disciples, Roman Ingarden, who failed to share the idealist predisposition of his mentor's philosophy, but argued in favor of a realist phenomenology. Back then, despite Ingarden's distancing himself from religion, he was nevertheless an influence not only on Wojtyla, but also on many of Wojtla's disciples in terms of a realist approach to phenomenology. It can be argued that through Ingarden, Scheler came to be known in Poland as it was invaded by Marxist ideology. Wojtyla dealt with Scheler's writings, though not all of them, in his habilitation thesis that he defended in Krakow in 1954, entitled An 4 Apud Alfred Wierzbicki, \"La barca interiore. Affinità spirituale del pensiero di Karol Wojyła con il pensiero di San Giovanni della Croce\" in: Karol Wojtyła, Metafisica della persona, pp. 10-11. 5 Cf. Rocco Buttiglione, Il pensiero di Karol Wojtyła (Milano: Editrice Jaca Book, 1982), pp. 69-78. 348 Wilhelm Dancă Evaluation of the Possibility of Devising a Christian Ethic Based on Max Scheler's System.6 Of Scheler's works, he took particular interest in Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die material Wertethik, a discussion of Immanuel Kant's views on ethics. In the conclusion to this thesis, Wojtyla rejects Scheler's system because of its emotional suppositions and the elimination of the normative moment from moral experience (as against Kant), while preserving the phenomenological approach, thus sharing Scheler's idea that ethics should rely on experience. Several key notions of personal philosophy from his best-known and most philosophical book, The Acting Person, can actually be identified in his habilitation thesis. The first of these is the concept of act, which, for Wojtyla, becomes a sort of window to the person's inner person: indeed, it can be argued that through his/her act, a person shows who he/she is, while at the same time finding fulfillment. Secondly, Wojtyla held the conviction that the phenomenological method can be employed to adequately reveal precisely how humans are persons, an aspect neglected in Saint Thomas' metaphysics. This is how Wojtyla's postulate of uniting metaphysics and phenomenology first appeared, to be later developed in The Acting Person. THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE PERSON IN ACTION The Acting Person was authored for a better understanding of man as person, Wojtyla's avowed aim. However, the study fails to prove that man is a person and that his actions are acts as such elements appear in the context of experience; consequently, it is not so much an instance of speculative, but rather empirical and existential exposition. In other words, what this book examines in the context of man's totality of experience is the moment when his personal character is revealed, that is, the moment when his action is transformed into that act by which man becomes good or bad in accordance with the values implicated in his action. From a methodological perspective, phenomenological analysis involves the following stages: 1. Identification of the common element, the basis or determiner of the action from among the dynamic components present in a particular domain of human activity; 2. once identified, the element is not to be examined in itself, but rather in the recurrences where it initially belonged and where its presence can be attested. Thus, experience serves two functions, as it is both the starting point of the analysis and verification instance for the reasoning. After reporting the data of experience, the author concludes that \"the act reveals the person, by means of the experience which verifies it.\" 6 Karol Wojtyła, \"Valutazioni sulla possibilità di costruire l'etica cristiana sulle basi del sistema di Max Schele\" in: Karol Wojtyła, Metafisica della persona, pp. 263-449. Wojtyla'sActing Person and Vertical Transcendence 349 From the beginning, the book points to knowledge and experience in a close relationship. Knowledge relies on experience, but experience transcends all knowledge, and by this, it establishes itself as the first constant appeal that reality makes to man's cognitive faculties. Indeed, experience is the only place where reality reveals itself to our cognitive faculties; thus the ensuing question is: of what, exactly, am I meant to have direct knowledge? Starting from this question, Wojtyla's phenomenological analysis reaches the level of conscience only to revert to experience, which reflects and internalizes the data of the conscience. This in turn leads to another question: what is the relationship between outer and inner experience? By means of experience, man experiences himself as \"I\"; thus man is meant for himself, and in this relationship lays a singular unrepeatable cognitive relationship. No external relationship with another human being can replace the inner relationship the \"I\" has with self. Inner experience is so profound that it cannot be entirely communicated to others. Man as \"I\" stands alone and is thus irreplaceable. After an analysis of man's original loneliness, viewed in the framework of inner experience, Wojtyla goes on to consider outer experience where, by means of knowledge, only \"man\" is experienced. Such experience involves two subjects: the former is represented by the others who look at me and get to know me through experience, from the outside; the latter is my \"I\" who, even for me, is an external somebody, an object of self-knowledge. Outer experience involves discovering the other as an inner somebody, and in this way the two sides of experience come together. The concept of evidence is closely allied to that of experience. The reference of the concept of evidence lies within the confines of lived experience, where understanding of man as person takes place as well. As a starting point in the phenomenological analysis of person, lived experience disproves the old dictum operari sequitur esse, as action and act are meant to approach the human being in order to reveal and understand it. Thus Wojtyla's understanding of the concept of person is a gnoseological but nevertheless dynamic one,7 since it makes sense of the acting person. In this way, Wojtyla argued that the person includes an irreducible something, which sets it apart from other entities, which for us are something, whereas a person is someone. The human person's specific character, as expressed by the semantic epitome \"someone,\" conditions and determines all of its activity and action, while distinguishing the person not only from things, but also from the other animates, which likewise act. Moreover, it should be noted that the distinction between \"something\" and \"someone\" is epitomized by the adjective \"rational,\" which specifies the nature of the human person. 7 Cf. Giovanni Reale, \"Saggio introduttivo\" in: Karol Wojtyła, Metafisica della persona, pp. LIII-LV. 350 Wilhelm Dancă The analysis of the human act leads Wojtyla to argue that the human person's rationality manifests itself mainly as the faculty of understanding the truth about good, to which human will is naturally predisposed. Evaluation of the truth about good as presented to the intelligence by the will allows man to be in constant touch with knowable reality, which, on one hand, remains with the human subject intentionally, and, on the other, allows man to distance himself from all things. CONTEMPORARY CULTURAL CHALLENGES Globalization and other forms of ideological or commercial dictatorship result in the cancelation of the distinctions between things, and even between persons and things, paving the way for the impoverishment of world cultures and local traditions. In view of Wojtyla's argument concerning man as person, I would argue in turn that by means of reason, human beings are capable of transcending the limits of the reality of which they are a part, and indeed the impending one. Such transcendence is of two kinds: a horizontal one, as when, by means of will and intelligence, the knowledgeable subject directs his attention toward the object and intentionally assimilates it and so transcends it, and a vertical one, as when the human person transcends itself. This latter type of transcendence is the result of self-determination, and implies the human person transcends itself not so much in the direction of truth as inside truth. Also, the concept of self-determination is related to the idea of freedom. Thus, if the person manifests itself through its will, that person's every act will confirm and instate the will as the person's property, while the person as a dynamic reality is constituted by its will. Consequently, as conscious action, which exists in lived experience, and is different from that peculiar dynamic termed \"something taking place in the man,\" a person's roots lie in his will, which, in turn, manifests itself in freedom, as when a man says, \"Yes, I can do this, because I am not constrained.\" Wojtyla's phenomenological analysis of the acting person includes a remarkable insight: the volitive aspect, or the moment of freedom, reveals the human person, because it is the basis of its self-determination. To conclude, if the human person reveals itself as such in human action, that is, in acts of free will, then man increasingly becomes person to the extent that he chooses the good. Nevertheless, choosing the good is never an improvisation; rather, it takes time to prepare, patiently and gradually, so that the will, as educated freedom, which specifies the human person, implies not only the absence of constraint, but also the option for values. The Roman-Catholic Theological Institute of Iaşi Iaşi, Romania, wilhelmdanca@yahoo.co CHAPTER XXVIII DEFINING HUMAN DIGNITY: LANDMARKS IN THE THOUGHT OF POPE BENEDICT XVI TARCIZIU ŞERBAN Abstract: It is well known that the Catholic Church has constantly declared its interest in man, in his dignity and fulfillment. In the midst of the mutations that have been taking place in the post-modern era, in the field of gnoseology as well as in that of ethics, concerning man and his dignity, the Catholic Church has brought its contribution, appreciating the positive aspects and denouncing what it considers to be factors of degradation. Pope Benedict XVI had several major interventions in this respect in his encyclicals or in books such as The Salt of the Earth (1996) and The Light of the World (2010). I am proposing hereby a synthesis of this vision of Pope Benedict XVI, which I want to offer as a set of guide rules for Romanian society, which appears to be more and more influenced by postmodernism. Keywords: human dignity, Pope Benedict XVI's thought, philosophical perspective, theological meanings. INTRODUCTION The theme of this symposium is an invitation for us to reflect on the value of the human person in the context of our world. To state the obvious, today's world context is, in many ways, defined by globalization. Despite the many undeniable advantages globalization has brought to mankind, the process is not without its shortcomings, such as those which manifest themselves in the form of numerous convulsions and crises. Such instances have been predominantly visible in the political order of things, mostly in the abrupt changes that took place at the end of the twentieth century in Eastern Europe, or those currently happening in the Arab world with explosions of violence. On one hand, the limits and dysfunctions of today's economic order are visible in the current crisis of the world economy. Such limits and crises appear to demand a forceful tackling of the very basis of the world economy in the context of globalization. These drawbacks are patent in many of the facets of the world's social order, where institutions meant to serve the common good and the human person seem more inclined to use the human person as an instrument, instead of serving its basic needs in keeping with the human person's God-given dignity. Last but not least, this trend is mostly visible in the globalization of culture. Romania being part of this global process, our symposium is a most welcome contribution to the process of pondering the state of the matter, defining concepts, 352 Tarciziu Şerban assessing hierarchies of values, comparing and challenging various fronts of ideas and practical experiences. All of these come from a variety of spheres of reflection, including those that pertain to the domain of philosophical and theological thought. To this end, it is particularly important that structural values be identified and defined: indeed, it is based on such foundations that any project of life can be built. It is obvious that one of these structural values is the value of human dignity. Notwithstanding the sometimes diverging positions at the heart of the matter under discussion, our debate is ultimately centered on ourselves as persons, as persons and human beings: all of us concrete people, flesh and bone human beings, each with one's unique unrepeatable destiny. My purpose here is to briefly touch on some of the ways in which human dignity is being assessed from a contemporary philosophical perspective, and then to focus as faithfully as I possibly can on the Catholic Church's understanding and vision of the subject, and on ways in which its teachings take part in this current process of reflection. In this respect, the most authoritative voice, of course, is the voice and pronouncements of Pope Benedict XVI. ASSESSING AND DEFINING HUMAN DIGNITY FROM A PHILOSOPHICAL PERSPECTIVE The issue of human dignity is at the very heart of all philosophical reflection, because it is naturally in its own area of exploration, in which the foundations of morals and ethics are generally defined. But how is one to define human dignity today, given the fact that at the dawn of this new century we have to deal with a situation in which \"the blurring of the truths proposed by various systems of contemporary thought demand a minimal, universally valid, and unique agreement centered on a principle common to the whole of mankind, while on the other hand, the recognition of the plurality of creeds and the respect due to all cultures seem to create an inescapable challenge\"? Moreover, the horrors of totalitarianism keep reminding us of the fact that \"the conditions of co-habitation are never to be taken as a definitive given.\" That was the grave question posed, among others, by Thomas De Koninck and Gilbert Larochelle in the opening thoughts of their book Human Dignity – Philosophy, Law, Politics, Economy, Medical Practice.1 In the chapter dealing with the \"Archeology of the Notion of Human Dignity,\" De Koninck gives a very suggestive bird's eye view on the subject. The author underscores the fact that the very term \"dignity\" suffers from a kind of semantic inflation, which in certain cases either obliterates or 1 Thomas De Koninck & Gilbert Larochelle, La Dignité humaine – Philosophie, droit, politique, économie, médicine (Paris: PUF, 2005). Defining Human Dignity in the Thought of Pope Benedict XVI 353 emphasizes a certain ambiguity already visible in its etymon.2 There appears to be also a slight problem of interpretation in fitting the concept of human dignity into the context and wording of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The latter declares that the unanimity of nations recognize the fact that \"all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.\" However, where does the unanimity of the signatory countries come from, given the fact that there are so many divergences amongst them? The best answer may be the one given by Paul Ricoeur, who observes that, despite all differences, in all cultures, no matter how far back in time we go, the same exigency exists: that \"something is due to all human beings for the simple reason of their being human.\" De Konninck goes on to underscore the fact that in all civilizations, an increasingly central place has been given across time to the dignity of the weak and underprivileged. Such a particular notion is to be found both in the thought of Confucius and in the Quran, just as in the writings of the Ancient Greeks. Gleaning from acknowledgments made by more recent authors – Emmanuel Levinas, George Steiner, and Schopenhauer, among others – De Konninck emphasizes the fact that the dignity of the person is a human attribute that applies regardless of rank, most revealingly to those less endowed with power. Confirmation of this defining feature can also be found in the thinking of such great precursors as Sophocles, Aristotle, Plato, the Aquinate, Pico della Mirandola, and Pascal, all of whose interpretations boil down to the basic truth that \"all our dignity resides in the fact that man alone is a thinking being\"; and, by way of consequence, that man alone is endowed with the conscience of individual death. To the same sphere of the human capacity to think belongs the person's capacity to decide, as there is no action without its counterpart: to act or not to act. Hence the link between dignity on one hand and the liberty to choose between different courses of action on the other, both rooted in the faculty to ponder and think. De Konninck also mentions Immanuel Kant, with possibly the best definition given to dignity in the modern era: the human person is infinitely priceless, superior to all other possible values in the world, as he said it. The value of the person, according to Kant's definition, is absolute. The logical consequence of this premise points to the absolute respect due to each and every human being; and, by way of consequence, the same leads to a new and essential conceptual link: the human person's natural aspiration for due recognition. Paradoxically, despite such positive premises, as we all know, the twentieth century has been one of rationally organized unspeakable atrocities, which should lead us to acknowledge the reverse concept: that of human indignity. Taking a look back at the historical development of 2 Dignus is connected to decet, i.e., \"should\", \"must\", \"it is proper\", \"it behooves\", another root-connection sends us to decus, which suggests such kindred notions as \"decency\" and \"dignity\"; and last but not least, decor, akin to the notions of \"honor\" and \"beauty\". 354 Tarciziu Şerban mankind, one can see that, as a rule, barbarity and savagery begins when man makes bold choices to ignore the dignity of his own person, the ageold commandment – know thyself – and thus to end up ignoring the dignity of his own fellow beings. It begins the moment one forgets that doing harm to someone else also means doing harm to oneself. This is the position where a fundamental solidarity concept usually comes into play: Do to others as you would have them do to you; or, to put it another way: What you don't like, don't do to your fellow beings. Unfortunately, as we all too frequently have occasion to notice, such tenets are more often than not distorted; they are either turned into moralizing assumptions or else into secular ideologies which blatantly turn their back on the gist of what such sayings predicate. Such positions throw into ever bolder relief the huge gap between certain statements that have been integrated into a Universal Declaration and \"the social realities of the violence to which many of our fellow beings are being exposed.\" The book I have been quoting from examines a number of areas in which human dignity is being denied or trampled on nowadays. Here are the relevant chapter titles: La dignité de mourir: un défi pour le droit (Dignity in Dying: a Challenge to Law); Le défi politique (Political Challenge); Repenser l'économie (Rethinking the Economy), and Fragments sur la médecine (Fragments on Medical Practice). DEFINING HUMAN DIGNITY IN THE PRONOUNCEMENTS OF VATICAN II The Second Vatican Council was the occasion when the Catholic Church expressed with full lucidity and responsibility its position in adapting itself to the new challenges posed in our era to the human person, to human society, and to the direction in which the world is evolving. The most important pronouncements in this sense are those contained in the pastoral Constitution Gaudium et Spes. According to the almost unanimous opinion of believers and unbelievers alike, all things on earth should be related to man as their center and crown. But what is man? About himself he has expressed, and continues to express, many divergent and even contradictory opinions. In these he often exalts himself as the absolute measure of all things or debases himself to the point of despair. The result is doubt and anxiety. The Church certainly understands these problems. Endowed with light from God, she can offer solutions to them, so that man's true situation can be portrayed and his defects explained, while at the same time his dignity and destiny are justly acknowledged. For Sacred Scripture teaches that man was created \"to the image of God,\" is capable of knowing and loving his Creator, and was appointed by Him as master of all earthly creatures that he might subdue them and use them to God's glory... man abused his liberty... set himself against God Defining Human Dignity in the Thought of Pope Benedict XVI 355 and sought to attain his goal apart from God... What divine revelation makes known to us agrees with experience. Examining his heart, man finds that he has inclinations toward evil too... Indeed, man finds that by himself he is incapable of battling the assaults of evil successfully... (GS 12.13) The truth is that only in the mystery of the incarnate Word does the mystery of man take on light... Christ, the final Adam, by the revelation of the mystery of the Father and His love, fully reveals man to man himself and makes his supreme calling clear... He Who is \"the image of the invisible God\" (Col 1:15), is Himself the perfect man. To the sons of Adam He restores the divine likeness which had been disfigured from the first sin onward... The Christian man, conformed to the likeness of that Son Who is the firstborn of many brothers, received \"the first-fruits of the Spirit\" (Rm 8:23) by which he becomes capable of discharging the new law of love. Through this Spirit, who is \"the pledge of our inheritance\" (Eph 1:14), the whole man is renewed from within, even to the achievement of \"the redemption of the body.\" All this holds true not only for Christians, but for all men of good will in whose hearts grace works in an unseen way. (GS 22) FROM THEORETICAL PRONOUNCEMENT TO CONCRETE ACTION Pope Benedict XVI wholly embraced the vision of Vatican II on human dignity, a vision which one can see transposed in many of his own pronouncements, especially in those dealing with situations in which human dignity has been at stake because of infringements. Such pronouncements have taken shape either in the form of ample documents, such as three Encyclical letters – Deus caritas est, Spe salvi, and Caritas in veritate, or in messages broadcast on various occasions. In the following, I would like to offer some quotes gleaned from these documents. They might be taken as landmarks to be taken into account in philosophical reflections on the current situation of human dignity in the age of globalization, and also in the context of the world challenges posed to human dignity by current socio-political and economy-related developments. Speaking to the Council of the Europe Parliamentary Assembly, the Pope had the following to say on the occasion of the 60-year Anniversary of The European Convention on Human Rights:3 Keeping in mind the context of today's society in which different peoples and cultures come together, it is imperative to develop the universal validity of these rights as well as their inviolability, inalienability, and indivisibility. On different occasions, I have pointed out the risks associated with relativism in the area of values, rights, and duties. If these were to lack an objective rational foundation, common to all peoples, and were based 3 Vatican, September 8th, 2010. 356 Tarciziu Şerban exclusively on particular cultures, legislative decisions, or court judgments, how could they offer a solid and long-lasting ground for supranational institutions such as the Council of Europe, and for your own task within that prestigious institution? How could a fruitful dialogue among cultures take place without common values, rights, and stable, universal principles understood in the same way by all Member States of the Council of Europe? These values, rights, and duties are rooted in the natural dignity of each person, something which is accessible to human reasoning. The Christian faith does not impede, but favors this search, and is an invitation to seek a supernatural basis for this dignity. His Holiness the Pope's remarks concluded laying special stress on the importance of specific situations in which these principles bear on the essentials of human life – from the moment of conception to death, with special emphasis on marriage, seen as an exclusive reciprocal gift of life between man and woman; last but not least on religious freedom and education. All of these are seen as compulsory conditions to be respected if one is to respond in a correct, responsible manner to the circumstances and challenges of history. On another occasion, addressing the participants to a Seminar on European Higher Education,4 Pope Benedict XVI had the following to say: With a quick glance at the \"old\" Continent, it is easy to see the cultural challenges that Europe faces today, since it is committed to rediscovering its own identity, which is not exclusively economic or political. The basic question today, as in the past, remains the anthropological question: What is man? Where does he come from? Where must he go? How must he go? In other words, it is a matter of clarifying the conception of the human being on which new projects are based. And you are rightly asking yourselves which human being, which image of man, does the university intend to serve: an individual withdrawn into the defense of his own interests, a single perspective of interests, a materialistic perspective, or a person who is open to solidarity with others in the search for the true meaning of existence, which must be a common meaning that transcends the individual? We also wonder what the relationship between the human person, science, and technology is. If in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, technology made amazing progress, at the beginning of the twenty-first century, further steps were taken: technology also took charge, thanks to computer science, of part of our mental processes, with consequences that involve our way of thinking and can condition our very freedom. 4 Vatican, April 1th, 2006. Defining Human Dignity in the Thought of Pope Benedict XVI 357 It must be forcefully stated that the human being cannot and must not ever be sacrificed to the success of science and technology: this is why the so-called \"anthropological question\" assumes its full importance. For us, the heirs of the humanist tradition founded on Christian values, this question should be faced in the light of the inspiring principles of our civilization, to be found in European universities: authentic laboratories for research and for deepening knowledge. CONCLUSION To conclude, I would like to quote from some particularly wellfocused remarks made by Pope Benedict in response to a speech of Romania's new Ambassador to the Holy See, Tătaru-Cazaban, in October last year, at the time of the presentation of his credential letters. It is true that the weight and tone of the Pope's remarks seem to carry a mostly political connotation. However, I find them pertinent in that they bear on the whole idea of reform in this country in the context of globalization. I find them also to be apposite and relevant in the context of the challenges the participants to this symposium are facing in their own constructive endeavors, as they try to respond the best they can to the great challenges posed by globalization to the society of today's Romania. Here is the Pope speaking to Romania: Twenty years ago, Romania decided to write a new page of its history. However, so many years lived under the yoke of a totalitarian ideology have deeply affected the attitude of individuals in political and economic life. After the period of the euphoria of freedom, your nation undertook with determination a process of rebuilding and healing... To pursue this renewal in depth, a number of new challenges need to be met in order... Dealing with the heritage left by Communism is difficult because of the disintegration of society and of the individual that it fostered. The authentic values, in fact, were overshadowed to the advantage of false theories that were idolized for reasons of State... Today, therefore, it is a question of engaging in the difficult task of the just ordering of human affairs by making good use of freedom. True freedom implies the search for truth and goodness, and it is achieved, precisely, by knowing and doing what is appropriate and right. Roman-Catholic Theological Institute \"St. Joseph\" Iaşi, Romania starciziu@yahoo.fr\n\nCHAPTER XXIX ANTHONY DE MELLO'S LIFELONG SPIRITUAL PEDAGOGY: AWAKENING AND AWARENESS MAGDALENA DUMITRANA Abstract: Anthony de Mello was one of the most known and appreciated, but also controversial, personalities of the Catholic world. Courageous and motivated by a profound and genuine belief, by the honest aspiration for helping people, and acting in a way that could not have been met by a positive reaction from the common people, he broke the patterns of fundamental theology, exclusively addressing his words to the spiritual zone that exists in any human being. Unlike other theologians and philosophers, one could say that de Mello's life and writings constitute one single body of expression. Lacking the calling for dogma and of a fanatical narration, de Mello directly enters the subject of daily living which, in his eyes, loses the banality of the common place. Daily life constitutes the space and time within which every human being meets every moment, the most profound spirituality. The understanding of this reality is obstructed by a barrier that is insurmountable for the great majority of peopleit is the barrier of the 'sleep.' The object of de Mello's discourse is precisely to awaken man from the obnubilation of his consciousness and to prepare and guide him psychologically and spiritually, in order to make him willing to assume his own genuine identity. The central concept in de Mello's writings and conferences is, therefore, that of awareness. The emphasis on this awakening state has its source in Indian spirituality, which de Mello has known well. At the same time, the Christian ground furnishes another important source in what concerns the essence of the message. The nucleus of the two types of spirituality is the same: awareness and self-awareness, which is the same thing as understanding – an understanding that transcends both the cognition and the feeling, both the philosophy and theology, reinstalling man in his own nature. On this basis, de Mello sketches his \"program of life,\" which is, in fact, a pedagogical way of helping people to discover and develop their own spirituality. As a spiritual teacher, de Mello explains what Reality is and indicates in his discourse the path and the instruments for reaching it. Keywords: delusion, spirituality, consciousness, freedom, truth. 360 Magdalena Dumitrana THE LIFE PURPOSE A man found an eagle's egg and put it in a nest of a barnyard hen. The eaglet hatched with a brood of chicks and grew up with them. All his life, the eagle did what the barnyard chicks did, thinking that he was a barnyard chicken. He scratched the earth for worms and insects. He clucked and cackled. And he would thrash his wings and fly a few feet into the air. Years passed and the eagle grew very old. One day he saw a magnificent bird above him in the cloudless sky. It glided in graceful majesty among the powerful wind currents, with scarcely a beat of its strong golden wings. The old eagle looked up in awe. \"Who's that?\" he asked. \"That's the eagle, the king of the birds,\" said his neighbor. \"He belongs to the sky. We belong to the earth-we're chickens.\" So the eagle lived and died a chicken, for that's what he thought he was. (Song of the Bird) Out of Anthony de Mello's little stories, perhaps this is the most known. It summarizes in its content the entire tragedy of humanity – a blind and unconscious humanity, of which members live, each of them, a lifeillusion. It is a story full of humor, a strong and real story; but also a tragic story. More than that, one can find in this little story another meaning, too. In it can be seen the huge task undertaken by de Mello: to \"force\" human individuals to know their real nature and live according to it. De Mello attempts to force, to break the barriers of the spiritual sleep, compelling people to understand, together with their own essence, the source of evil in everybody's life and also, the way of changing the sleep slavery. In short, de Mello was, and still is, by his writings, an Awakener, par excellence. Very well known within the Catholic world, de Mello is almost completely ignored by the Orthodox part of Christianity. There, where his name is familiar, his spirit has remained hidden.1 De Mello is perhaps one of the rare cases of the modern world where philosophy, belief, and the life-style constitute a single entity, impossible to be fragmentized. As a priest, following Thomas d'Aquino in his affirmations toward the end of his life, he understood the lack of substance of dogmatism. As a philosopher, he kept himself far from theoretical constructions, considering them as being mostly devoid of reality. As a human being, however, he could not but live in full authenticity, within which belief, philosophy and breathing cannot exist separately, not even in a theoretical framework. One might say that de Mello is the answer to the question: \"What is the usefulness of philosophy?\" or to the similar one: \"What is the utility of belief?\" The answer is simple: to know how to live in full consciousness. 1 In Romania, only few years ago, some of his volumes of stories were translated. Unfortunately, in the public conscience, they were perceived as being so called \"therapeutical stories\". Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy 361 And de Mello presents also the technique by which the human individual can awaken to life. ATTACHMENTS The fundamental feature of life, as lived by the most people, is the lack of freedom – an accepted, consentual, and normalized lack of freedom. This lack of freedom is the principle that governs social life; it is the insurer of happiness. Relationships, the observance of regulations of any kind; the trust that what is said by the \"professionals\" of any category is right and good; the appreciation of one's own value through external confirmations; to no longer speak of the importance of financial and social status; all these ingredients fill the jar of human happiness. What de Mello does is to take this jar and he breaks it down to the ground. Once the illusions are dispelled, only the truth remains. Life as Sleep \"Life is a dream\" – here is a statement which is familiar to the Occidentals.2 It seems to belong to the arts, to aesthetics, and therefore, it finds the emotional gate open. Dreams belong to sleep; therefore it can be pleasant to sleep – to take a rest, to feel comfortable, enter another reality, becoming somebody else in some other place, where the conflicts and discontents are extinguished or solved, places where one feels safe. A safe dream – this is the rule for the majority of people, even a definition of happiness. But for someone adept in Oriental wisdom, the affirmation that people live a sleeping life does not contain anything aesthetic, anything philosophical or pleasure provoking. It is only a realistic, palpable description of human existence. This second meaning is the one in which de Mello places his discourse, a natural thing, since his native country is India (a fact that he never ceases to mention). The theme of 'life as sleep' is typical for Indian spirituality, but the way de Mello approaches this topic is actually appropriate to the Western spirit: direct, often with hardness, apparently with cynicism. Let us not be deceived by this language that, in fact, expresses a profound concern. What would happen if, reading this passage, we suspected the speaker of cruelty: \"And if thy hand offends thee, cut it off...\"? (Mark, 9: 43-47). Cutting off illusion is the specialty of de Mello's \"humorous\" philosophy: \"Most people, even though they don't know it, are asleep. They're born asleep, they live asleep, they marry in 2 \"La vida es sueño\" (Life is a dream), a play by Pedro Calderón de la Barca (sec. XVII). 362 Magdalena Dumitrana their sleep, they breed children in their sleep, they die in their sleep, without ever waking up.\"3 The state of life-sleep has many advantages: firstly, it is claimed that this state is the way of obtaining happiness. Are not all people chasing after happiness? Do not all the philosophies proclaim that human nature's essence is the pursuit of happiness? But what does happiness mean in this case? In short – the lack of worries and nice, warm feelings. It means to sleep/live cozy; to sleep safely through all the socially institutionalized illusions; it means to react \"rightly\" as an obedient organism, waiting for its gratification. \"Normally, the way it goes, I press a button and you're up; I press another button and you're down. And you like that. How many people do you know who are unaffected by praise or blame? That isn't human, we say. Human means that you have to be a little monkey, so everybody can twist your tail and you do whatever you ought to be doing...We are so mechanical, so controlled. We write books about being controlled, and how wonderful it is to be controlled, and how necessary it is that people tell you you're okay. Then, you'll have a good feeling about yourself.\"4 In this state, everything a man thinks that is real, that belongs to that reality, that he wants to have because it is worthy, is nothing in fact but the effect of mist characterizing this unconscious condition. At the basis of this life-sleep lies an element that we used to consider as normal-selfishness. Selfishness in its pure state is easy to identify, as it is defined by the possessive pronoun: my wish, my object, my family, my misery, my happiness. The second kind of selfishness, however, is more difficult to seize, on account of its renouncing of external attributes and specific verbal expressions. The label utilized is \"devotion.\" This is the selflove called \"charity.\" But human egoisms do not stop here: \"There are three types of selfishness. The first type is the one where I give myself the pleasure of pleasing myself. That's what we generally call selfcenteredness. The second is when I give myself the pleasure of pleasing others. That would be a more refined kind of selfishness... Then you've got the third type, which is the worst: when you do something good so that you won't get a bad feeling... We don't want to do the hurting ourselves because we'll get hurt! Ah, there it is. If we do the hurting, others will have a bad opinion of us. They won't like us, they'll talk against us, and we don't like that.\"5 Self-enteredness as a need to seek the well-being condition for oneself is built on a series of ideas – illusions which consider the comfortable state as a criterion of evaluation for social and individual progress. In fact, these ideas are simple dependencies that do not reach in any way the essence of 3 Anthony de Mello, Awareness. A. de Mello Spirituality Conference in His Own Words, Edited by J. Francis Stroud, S.J. (London: Fount Paperbacks, 1990), p. 5. 4 Ibid., p. 40. 5 Ibid., pp.19; 24; 26. Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy 363 human existence, but which actually prevent human beings from grasping it. Beside egoism, one of the important features of the life-sleep is the wish for happiness. But happiness, in the way the common man understands it, is one of his many illusions, says de Mello. At the level of common understanding, happiness is a conditioned state. It is conditioned by another being, thing, or situation. Happiness is a conditioned reflex, in which the reinforcing stimulus is social comfort. Man cannot be simply happy; he must be connected to something. In another words, although he wishes and acts for the acquisition of his own happiness, man is convinced that happiness can be obtained only by his attachment to something else, outside of his Self. So, he thinks that happiness can be obtained only by renouncing his own freedom. Consequently, it can be asserted in this flow of thinking that slavery is the bearer of happiness or at least, the most accessible form of happiness. Attachment in the adult life is not the same principle that helps (or hinders) a child to develop a balanced personality. In adulthood, this bond appears as a weakness of slavery. The unconditioned, uncritical obedience to norms, to the structures of ideas, to ideologies, becomes the positive principle of social behavior, the criterion of good and evil. External regulation is the cognitive and moral norm which destroys the faintest attempt at thinking. In this respect, there is a little story by de Mello about a \"...fellow in London after the war. He's sitting with a parcel wrapped in brown paper in his lap. It's a big, heavy object. The bus conductor comes up to him and says, 'What do you have on your lap there?' And the man says, 'This is an unexploded bomb. We dug it out of the garden and I'm taking it to the police station.' The conductor says, 'You don't want to carry that on your lap. Put it under the seat.'\"6 Obviously, the driver is not interested in the content of the message, but only in behavior regulation. But the rules are expressed by words and from here, a new slavery. The words are carriers of personal experiences; therefore, here there is a new link in the chain of attachments. Through the instrumentality of words are expressed all the cultural conditionings. These attachments are not necessarily negative. They become, however, a burden when an individual defines himself by these word attachments, and when blinded by what he believes, is no more able to see the real phenomena: \"I need to talk about words and concepts because I must explain to you why it is, when we look at a tree, we really don't see. We think we do, but we don't. When we look at a person, we really don't see that person, we only think we do. What we're seeing is something that we fixed in our mind. We get an impression and we hold on to that impression, and we keep looking at the person through that impression. And we do this with almost everything.\"7 Let us listen to another story, shocking by the simplicity of its truth. The man just 6 Ibid., pp. 41-42. 7 Ibid., p. 103. 364 Magdalena Dumitrana does not want to change his ideas, even if reality slaps him in the face: \"Henry, how you've changed! You were so tall and you've grown so short. You were so well built and you've grown so thin. You were so fair and you've become so dark. What happened to you, Henry?\" Henry says, \"I'm not Henry. I'm John.\" \"Oh, you changed your name too!\"8 Indiscriminate attachment to norms determines also an urgent need for reward. One is able to appreciate his life as 'normal' and 'good' only through external signals: it is important to be respectable, to be loved and appreciated; otherwise, you are not \"recognized\" as a worthy human being. But all of these are only illusion, says the Indian Catholic priest, illusion and self-imprisonment. The life composed by different social dependencies is a life impregnated with fear and anger. There is only one evil in the world, affirms de Mello, and this is fear: the fear of failure, the fear of not getting, the fear of not loosing, the fear of not being appreciated. The fear of not seeing fulfilled your own desires makes you aggressive: \"It's only when you are afraid that you become angry. Think of the last time you were angry and search for the fear behind it. What were you afraid of seeing? What were you afraid of losing? What were you afraid would be taken from you? That's where the anger comes from.\"9 None of these attachments is real. But we must understand what reality actually means for de Mello. What is real is perceived and understood in the full wakeful state, with a full consciousness; real is only the truth. Neither the external norms nor the external appreciation, neither fear nor anger are real; they do not belong to the human essence. They are only delusions born by the sleepy-life, by the system of dependencies that an individual considers as being the basic condition for a normal life. This conditioning serves as a substitute for reality, distorting it and enclaving it in the ghetto of counterfeit ideas. RELIGION As long as the psychologist and philosopher de Mello focuses on the discussion about social and moral regulations and on the knowledge and self-knowledge of the psychological mechanisms determining human behavior, things seem to develop in a regular way. But Father de Mello does not stop there; he provokes agitation and indignation when he approaches the delicate subject of religion. It seems, by its affirmations, that he overturns the entire scaffolding of religious ideology – of all religions, equally. Thus, he says: Spirituality is a reality much broader than one religion or another; there is no equivalence between these two: \"...I want you to understand 8 Ibid., p. 28. 9 Ibid., p. 62. Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy 365 something right at the beginning, that religion is not – I repeat: not – necessarily connected with spirituality.\"10 The excess of ritualism and the obligation of observing church regulations darken the Reality on which faith and spiritual truth is based: \"You know that there are times...when the Blessed Sacrament becomes more important than Jesus Christ, when worship becomes more important than love, when the Church becomes more important than life, when God becomes more important than the neighbor. And so it goes on. That's the danger. To my mind this is what Jesus was evidently calling us to – first things first! The human being is much more important than the Sabbath.\"11 Excessive regulations divide and separate people from spiritual reality, leading to phenomena similar to idolatry. For example: \"There was a group of a thousand people who went on a pilgrimage to Mexico City to venerate the shrine of Our Lady of Guadelupe. They sat down before the statue in protest because the Bishop of the Diocese had declared Our Lady of Lourdes patroness of the diocese! They were sure that Our Lady of Guadalupe felt this very much, so they were doing the protest in reparation for the offense.\"12 Religion is not only a conglomerate of dogmas, but also one of vanities; any religion that considers it knows everything about God raises a barrier between individuals and God, forcing its believers to an unconditional trust in a doctrine. Instead of a spiritual reality, religion presents a bag of words: \"The fact is that you're surrounded by God and you don't see God, because you \"know\" about God. The final barrier to the vision of God is your God concept. You miss God because you think you know. That's the terrible thing about religion. That's what the gospels were saying, that religious people 'knew,' so they got rid of Jesus. The highest knowledge of God is to know God as unknowable. There is far too much God talk; the world is sick of it... All revelations, however divine, are never any more than a finger pointing to the moon. As we say in the East, when the sage points to the moon, all the idiot sees is the finger.\"13 De Mello's assertions about religion could appear to a superficial mind as attacks on Christianity and further, at Catholicism. Nothing is more false. A more attentive mind or rather, a detached mind, to use one of de Mello's dear words, understands that, in fact, it is not about religion in itself. De Mello, a Catholic priest, has not disowned his vocation; not for a second. What he criticizes in this context is the people's illusions, their opinions toward the unseen reality, the hubris of a limited mind to explain what is limitless. De Mello's intention is only to shake the structure of the cognitive illusions that form religious dogmas; from (any) Church point of view, these dogmas constitute the required glasses for any follower, glasses 10 Ibid., p. 21. 11 Ibid., pp. 66-67. 12 Ibid., pp. 52-53. 13 Ibid., p. 102. 366 Magdalena Dumitrana without which his belief cannot be \"right.\" The thick sieve of religious dogmatism is the target of de Mello's attack in his striving to free people from ideological slavery. The corseting in rituals of belief, the consideration of events only on the basis of religious ideology, leads people in precisely the opposite direction than that of the one declared. The result of this fight has a double aspect: one is the echo in people's consciousness and the other is the echo in the Church, as the administrator of religion. The first aspect is related to each person's individuality and cannot actually be evaluated. The second is easy to assess, as being represented by a dogmatic document presented by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.14 Obviously, there is a strong desynchronizing 14 Here is the \"Notification,\" very well known by Catholics but still unknown by the Orthodox Christians: Congregation For The Doctrine Of The Faith. Notification Concerning. The Writings Of Father Anthony De Mello, S.J. The Indian Jesuit priest, Father Anthony de Mello, (1931-1987) is well known due to his numerous publications which, translated into various languages, have been widely circulated in many countries of the world, though not all of these texts were authorized by him for publication. His works, which almost always take the form of brief stories, contain some valid elements of Oriental wisdom. These can be helpful in achieving self-mastery, in breaking the bonds and feelings that keep us from being free, and in approaching with serenity the various vicissitudes of life. Especially in his early writings, Father de Mello, while revealing the influence of Buddhist and Taoist spiritual currents, remained within the lines of Christian spirituality. In these books, he treats the different kinds of prayer: petition, intercession, and praise, as well as contemplation of the mysteries of the life of Christ, etc. But already in certain passages in these early works and to a greater degree in his later publications, one notices a progressive distancing from the essential contents of the Christian faith. In place of the revelation which has come in the person of Jesus Christ, he substitutes an intuition of God without form or image, to the point of speaking of God as a pure void. To see God it is enough to look directly at the world. Nothing can be said about God; the only knowing is unknowing. To pose the question of his existence is already nonsense. This radical apophaticism leads even to a denial that the Bible contains valid statements about God. The words of Scripture are indications which serve only to lead a person to silence. In other passages, the judgment on sacred religious texts, not excluding the Bible, becomes even more severe: they are said to prevent people from following their own common sense and cause them to become obtuse and cruel. Religions, including Christianity, are one of the major obstacles to the discovery of truth. This truth, however, is never defined by the author in its precise contents. For him, to think that the God of one's own religion as the Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy 367 between the levels of the discussion, which are determined by completely different objectives. While Father de Mello refers to the criterion of Truth, the Notification of the Congregation refers to the doctrine. Interesting to note, the \"verdict\" was pronounced only eleven years after de Mello's death, and was signed by one Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger. And even more interesting, the act was signed on the day of the commemoration of St. John the Baptizer celebration, a great spiritual revolutionary, in whose footsteps followed Anthony de Mello. only one is simply fanaticism. \"God\" is considered as a cosmic reality, vague and omnipresent; the personal nature of God is ignored and in practice denied. Father de Mello demonstrates an appreciation for Jesus, of whom he declares himself to be a \"disciple.\" But he considers Jesus as a master alongside others. The only difference from other men is that Jesus is \"awake\" and fully free, while others are not. Jesus is not recognized as the Son of God, but simply as the one who teaches us that all people are children of God. In addition, the author's statements on the final destiny of man give rise to perplexity. At one point, he speaks of a \"dissolving\" into the impersonal God, as salt dissolves in water. On various occasions, the question of destiny after death is declared to be irrelevant; only the present life should be of interest. With respect to this life, since evil is simply ignorance, there are no objective rules of morality. Good and evil are simply mental evaluations imposed upon reality. Consistent with what has been presented, one can understand how, according to the author, any belief or profession of faith whether in God or in Christ cannot but impede one's personal access to truth. The Church, making the word of God in Holy Scripture into an idol, has ended up banishing God from the temple. She has consequently lost the authority to teach in the name of Christ. With the present Notification, in order to protect the good of the Christian faithful, this Congregation declares that the above-mentioned positions are incompatible with the Catholic faith and can cause grave harm. The Sovereign Pontiff John Paul II, at the Audience granted to the undersigned Cardinal Prefect, approved the present Notification, adopted in the Ordinary Session of this Congregation, and ordered its publication. Rome, from the offices of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, June 24, 1998. The Solemnity of the Birth of John the Baptist. + Joseph Card. Ratzinger Prefect + Tarcisio Bertone, S.D.B. Archbishop Emeritus of Vercelli Secretary www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/demello; http:// www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/documents/rc_con_cfai th_doc_19980624_demello_en.html 368 Magdalena Dumitrana AWARENESS – AWAKENING – AWARENESS Father de Mello's message is difficult to understand, as in fact, are all spiritual messages, though, paradoxically, the linguistic form is more than accessible. The same for the literary form: stories, personal memories, others' memories, direct and shocking words suddenly sweetened by a good laugh, after which, again, the thunder startles the audience. A series of dramatic ingredients gives flavor to the common man's daily life: routines, regulations, necessary obediences, are all approached both with irony and gravity. But none of these is too serious from the point of view of spiritual reality except one: the offense of mental routine. The uncritical acceptance imposed by institutionalized constructions; the acceptance of thinking coming from outside; the thought of being proved \"good\" by the immediate effects of comfort; the voluntary renunciation of any attempt at personal judgment; self-repudiation in the case of any weak sign of courage of asking \"why?\"; the unquestioning obedience of the external control of one's feelings, thoughts, and attitudes; the acceptance with gratitude of small rewards for good behavior, the right opinion, the right emotions – all of these constitute, beyond all kinds of ideologies, the greatest sin of the human being: the sin of abandoning one's own essence, one's own genuine nature, the dignity of one's spiritual species. And for what? For a comfortable life in a fake psychological and social construction. So what about this message of Anthony de Mello? Being firmly rejected by religious dogma, it does not belong, for sure, to any kind of institutionalized religion, though its spirit is surely fitted to Christianity. Some people accept the existence of this message only because it is introduced in a literary shape; however, this literature aims farther than it appears at first sight. But could one call this message of de Mello a philosophy? No doubt, one could rightly affirm that: a special kind of philosophy, which shakes, breaks, destroys the dreams of death, dissipates the delusions that do not mean anything else but a despairing flight from reality and an accepted incapability to face the social tornados – tornados which twist relationships, ideologies, survival; ideological manipulations having as a main goal keeping the individual from understanding reality and living in it. What Father de Mello's effort is in the first place is to stimulate this awareness of the state of the somnolence, of the collective hypnosis inducing in people the illusion of an existence outside of the Existence, together with the negation of any other non-dreamy reality. What is absolutely special in his message is that, though he speaks about general phenomena of society, he aims at each and every individual, and each person equally perceives the message as addressed directly and exclusively to him. This is, one can say, an action of a spiritual pedagogy, where the Professor can be identified as the Master from de Mello's stories, a spiritual master, who is not recruited by any ideology; he indicates to his disciple, by the touch of his awakening word, a scintilla of truth. This touch is the Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy 369 impulse that any spiritual master gives to his followers to show them the path. In receiving this gift, somehow, outside his own decision, the common individual finds himself on the first step of consciousness, which brings out the understanding of his own condition and also, an attempt to look at it with detachment. Here, one can make a comparison with some nightdreams, when the dreamer becomes conscious, not letting himself be dragged any more by the unreal action of the dream. Evidently, a simple consciousness of a dream state does not lead too far. Again, the spiritual philosophy or, let us say, the spiritual pedagogy of Anthony de Mello intervenes almost with brutality, saying, \"Wake up!\" It is a resonant shake, but de Mello's voice, far from being one of religious revolt, as interpreted by dogmatic minds, does nothing more than to remind the sleepy one, using the call addressed by the Lord to his disciples, through all the world's holy texts and religious traditions. The awakening is the fundamental act of simultaneous understanding of the present condition and the atemporal human nature. Here, indeed, is situated the anteroom of the will and action toward Awareness, the leap from the artificial sleepy world to Reality. In other words, the condition asserted by the \"world is a dream\" is killed together with the dreamer inside: \"I've often said to people that the way to really live is to die.\"15 But what is so scandalous in this affirmation? Why should we not agree with it when we accept the same affirmation from the eremites of Philokalia? As a matter of fact, it is the same message, common to both Oriental and Occidental mystics – to be dead to the world. The only difference is that they were somewhere, sometime, far away and a long time ago, and this allows us refer to them with detachment and no obligation on our part, while de Mello lives here and now, forcing the truth to spring out in the light of the conscience, a painful process for which no one else is responsible but oneself, whether in fulfillment or failure. The principle of the life-dream is precisely this one: to not have obligations, to not feel any guilt for anything, to not have the responsibility of one's own life – somebody else lives me, lives my life, with the declared aim to make me feel well. A mass of somnolent people – this is the triumph toward which all ideologies aspire. Returning to a previous assertion, we notice that de Mello speaks about two kinds of death, two totally different essences being hidden under the same name. The first type, common among people, refers to the spiritual beggar, fearing for his petite wealth: \"If I can't get you to peep out of your narrow beliefs and convictions and look at another world, you're dead; you're completely dead; life has passed by you. You're sitting in your little prison, where you're frightened; you're going to lose your God, your 15Anthony de Mello, Awareness. A. de Mello Spirituality Conference in His Own Words, edited by J. Francis Stroud, S.J. (London: Fount Paperbacks, 1990), p. 169. 370 Magdalena Dumitrana religion, your friends, all kinds of things. Life is for the gambler, it really is. That's what Jesus was saying.\"16 But what does this risk mean, after all? De Mello tells us: it is the courage to wake up, to get out from comfort, to come out from hypnosis, to come out from fear. Awakening is the only way to freedom – and freedom means, \"to see at last with a vision that is clear and unclouded by fear or desire...You will see, you will know beyond concepts and conditioning, addictions and attachments.\"17 De Mello stops here with the outline of his program for life. His objective is not to \"redeem\" people, but to convince people – Western ones – to undertake a transformation, to become aware of their condition of death-sleep, and to change themselves by Awakening. He cannot ask more from the common man. His mission is to indicate the way and to tell something about what is going to happen afterward. Once awakened, man becomes able to understand his own free nature and, therefore, to choose in full consciousness. But \"when you awaken, when you understand, when you see, the world becomes right\"18 – in other words, inside the new condition, to think about a choice is useless, because the choice presupposes duality, conflict, tension. Paradoxically, the state of liberty obtained by awakening reduces the possibility and the desire to choose, because when \"you finally awake, you don't try to make good things happen; they just happen. You understand suddenly that everything that happens to you is good.\"19 It is the affirmation of a man who knows, who does not need any argument for the evidence, nor the proof of what exists. We are used to considering philosophy as something addressed exclusively to the intellect, to the mind, to the reason; only the language, in its quality of the cognitive process is allowed in this closed kingdom. The effects of these regulations are seen in modern times – philosophy is a product of the limitations of the conceited human mind pretending to explain the inexplicable. Now, philosophy is just another ideological category. To avoid this effect and also in a new awareness of its mission, philosophy directed its preoccupations to \"generally more specific\" fields, approaching particular sectors of human life. Therefore, one could situate Anthony de Mello's philosophy, as well as his spiritual pedagogy, within this field of specific interest. On the other side, Father de Mello cannot be assimilated to any present philosophical trend, not by the language used and even less by his objectives. Interestingly enough, however, one can find an affiliation with a certain pedagogical ray still functional today. In the seventeenth century, Jan Amos Comenius, was building a theological conception from which a philosophical conception was derived; in its turn, its philosophy supported an educational theory and practice which has 16 Ibid., p. 170. 17 Ibid., p. 734. 18 Ibid., p. 84. 19 Ibid., p. 88. Anthony de Mello's Lifelong Spiritual Pedagogy 371 changed the world in the field of pedagogy. This spirit was continued by some European pedagogues; in India, Sri Aurobindo has delineated a type of integral education aiming to facilitate spiritual growth. But Anthony de Mello is not a pedagogue in the ideological sense of the word. First of all, he is a mystic; a mystic who teaches, not preaches; a mystic hard to recognize in a modern world that places this kind of person between the pages of old books, rather than in a real life. A mystic has, necessarily, a philosophical conception and also an educational one – a starting point and a way of becoming. But these conceptions have no correspondence with what we know about these activities, and an analogy would not present interest or clarifying effects. The third phase of de Mello's spiritual pedagogy is not clearly expressed or even sketched in his speeches or writings. It can be realized only by the efforts of awakening as a process of striving for change. Awareness, in its highest form, can be explained only in the way de Mello explains love: \"...love is not something that you have; love is something that has you!\"20 or perhaps by one of his little stories scattering the road of knowledge: \"Help us to discover God./Nobody can help you with this./Why not?/For the same reason that nobody can help the fish to discover the ocean.\"21 A VERY SHORT CONCLUSION At first sight, Anthony de Mello's spiritual philosophy is based on negative truths. In Hinduism, in Jnana Yoga this cognitive attitude could be called a \"neti, neti\" search (neither this, nor that); it is no wonder, if taking into consideration not only de Mello's native country but even more, his vocation for truth. But for the Occidental man, to whom it is addressed, de Mello's discourse is much simplified. The aspects approached are one by one negated – as reality, as authenticity. It seems that this method is the most appropriate for human understanding. A mind judging with partiality could stop here in its comprehension; this mind is, usually, a rational mind, looking for palpable evidence. But there is a difference in knowing as a process and direct knowledge as such. The logical mind is in a continuous movement in its desire for knowing. This mind knows \"in part.\" De Mello's discourse is related to the second acceptation. He does not need anymore to look to discover something, for he has already discovered it; and in this way, he is much closer to the whole than reasoning can be. That is why his words are addressed to intuition rather than to logic. The ideological fanatic, however, cannot appeal either to logic or intuition, so, his handy instrument is the \"anathema,\" an effect foreseen by 20 Ibid., p. 176. 21 Id., Înţelepciune la minut, (One Minute Wisdom) (Braşov: Editura Mix, 2004), p. 91 372 Magdalena Dumitrana Father de Mello, who sees himself surrounded by: \"...dead people running governments, dead people running big business, dead people educating others.\"22 Still, his philosophy – his life program, as he likes to say – is addressed precisely to these sleepers in their sleep of death. The metaphysical \"why\" has no purport here; it has no meaning either as question or as answer. It is just one among many other mental illusions. The only method is to wake up, to live aware of what is happening to you, to understand reality as it is. The only state of non-illusion is the consciousness which in its higher plane, the plane of Awareness, is identical with freedom, truth, and ultimately with God. By his program of awakening and awareness, Anthony de Mello does not establish a philosophical construct, but delineates a philosophical experience, indicating also a method for reaching it. Undoubtedly, this ought to be the meaning of philosophy today. University of Piteşti Bucharest, Romania mdumitrana@yahoo.com 22 Anthony de Mello, Awareness. A. de Mello Spirituality Conference in His Own Words, edited by J. Francis Stroud, S.J. (London: Fount Paperbacks, 1990), p. 177. CHAPTER XXX THE HUMAN PERSON BETWEEN TRANSCENDENCE AND FAULT: A PHILOSOPHICAL PERSPECTIVE1 CĂTĂLIN BOBB Abstract: \"What would we know about contrivance, hatred, or deception, were it not for the confession of novels and stories?\" Paul Ricoeur asks himself. Although the present question, within the context in which it is stated, has a profoundly rhetorical character, it can be stated directly by shifting the emphasis. What would we know about the human being were it not for contrivance, hatred, and deception? In other words, my task is to search within this text, in the footsteps of Paul Ricoeur, for what might be called a philosophical anthropology of the negative; a philosophy centered on elements excluded by default from an axiological theory but which, as we shall see, are fundamental to any axiological theory. Freedom and Nature, Paul Ricoeur's doctoral thesis, begins with a sentence that will never be explicitly closed and which Paul Ricoeur will exploit in all of his subsequent works, but never directly. It is about two fundamental concepts which offer the totality of human subjectivity: fault and transcendence. More explicitly, in Ricoeur's own words, fault as the absolute deficiency of the human being and transcendence as the absolute origin of subjectivity. Thus, I suggest, following Ricoeur, that a philosophy that forces itself to analyze the fundamental deficiencies of the human being fails, as long as it remains within the strict boundaries of philosophy, as long as it refuses to open toward a mythological, theological, or religious form. The reasoning is this: pure will tells us nothing of morality; understanding morality and fundamentally human values stems from within human passions; understanding passions and a possible solution regarding them surpasses the possibilities of philosophy. Keywords: Paul Ricoeur, transcendence, fault, will, epoché, poetics of the will THE LIMITS OF WILL: TRANSCENDENCE AND FAULT The project of Philosophy of the Will,2 opened by the hinge volume 1 This paper was written within The Knowledge Based Society Project supported by the Sectorial Operational Programme Human Resources Development (SOP HRD), financed from the European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract number POSDRU ID 56815. 374 Cătălin Bobb The Voluntary and the Involuntary, lets us know from the start that what is outside phenomenological analysis should not be of interest to us, because the core of the analyses will be a \"pure description and a pure understanding of the voluntary and the involuntary\"3 as fundamental structures of will. To be able to reach these fundamental structures, we have to operate from the beginning with an abstraction, a bracketing, an epoché of fault and transcendence. This means that The Voluntary and the Involuntary opens with a closure. More explicitly, there is no phenomenology of transcendence and fault4 just to be able to later state that the ultimate purpose of this work will be the direct analysis of fault and transcendence. When we speak of the ultimate purpose of Philosophy of the Will, we must necessarily bear in mind all three volumes. The impossibility of building a phenomenology of transcendence and fault is, in the first volume, relative to the condition of being human, however prosaic this may be. The two concepts are denied a phenomenological analysis because they are the absolute marginal points: in the case of the fault, \"which profoundly alters man's intelligibility,\" and respectively, in the case of transcendence, \"which hides within it the ultimate origin of subjectivity.\"5 Denying from the start the access of phenomenology to the \"ultimate origin of subjectivity,\" as well as to the \"specific something\" that \"profoundly alters man's intelligibility,\" it would seem that phenomenology is condemned to discuss everything but the \"things in themselves.\" It is truly important to understand well what Ricoeur means by abstracting fault and transcendence. The French philosopher openly states: \"The fundamental structures of the voluntary and the involuntary which we shall seek to describe and understand acquire their full significance only when the abstraction which enables us to elaborate them is removed.\"6 In fact, we cannot fully understand the fundamental structures of will (the voluntary and the involuntary) nor the fundamental structures of the voluntary and involuntary in a pure description, because we will only be able to analyze their true significance when description and pure understanding are dissolved, thus, only when abstraction, which gives us the possibility to purely describe and purely understand the voluntary and the involuntary, will be suppressed. This game where we use abstraction in a phenomenological paradigm, abandoning it and then moving to another 2 Philosophy of the Will is composed of three volumes: Freedom and Nature (1950), Fallible Man (1960) and The Symbolism of Evil (1960). French originals: Philosophie de la volonté 1. Le volontaire et l'involontaire (Paris: Aubier, 1950), Philosophie de la volonté 2. Finitude et culpabilité. Livre I. L'homme faillible. Livre II. La symbolique du mal (Paris: Aubier, 1960). 3 Paul Ricoeur, Freedom and Nature, translated by Erazim V. Kohak (Ilionois: Northwestern University Press, 2007), p. 3. 4 Ibid. 5 Ibid. (my emphasis). 6 Ibid. The Human Person between Transcendence and Fault 375 paradigm we do not yet know, produces real difficulties to an adequate understanding of the role of this concept. This is why it is inevitable to go back to Husserl through Ricoeur. EPOCHÉ Beyond the differences marked by the entire Ricoeurian exegesis, there are differences that Ricoeur himself points out, and they are easy to notice. Ricoeur transforms and remodels, with honesty and without any excessively destructive demands, purely Husserlian concepts, to give them a new meaning, one that no longer complies with the initial trajectory it is supposed to have. Ricoeur operates such a turning (to avoid using distortion) at the level of the concept of abstraction, or, even better, over the very debated concept of \"phenomenological reduction.\" Ricoeur tells us that abstraction helps us to bracket fault and transcendence. Although things are clear, that transcendence and fault must be eliminated from the horizon of intentionality when we are attempting a pure description of the voluntary and involuntary as fundamental structures of will. Ricoeur almost completely misappropriates the epoché's initial meaning. This evacuation is justified for more than one reason, and we will try to discern them at the level of fault and transcendence, but it must be stated now that the Ricoeurian epoché functions, or is supposed to function, as a method completely under Husserlian protection: \"This abstraction is in some respects akin to what Husserl calls eidetic reduction, that is, bracketing of the fact and elaborating on the idea of meaning.\"7 Thus, it is inevitably mandatory to inquire as to which regard is the abstraction similar to Husserl's and to which it isn't, so we must inquire in regard to the differences between the Husserlian epoché8 and the Ricoeurian epoché. The difficulties of such an approach are relative to the obvious ambiguities Ricoeur's text manifests. Ricoeur is not completely clear when he tells us how the abstraction is similar to what Husserl calls \"eidetic reduction.\" It is up to us to grasp what Ricoeur wishes to suggest through the abstraction of fault and transcendence. Nonetheless, to approach a central problem of Husserl's phenomenology, only to distinguish a similar, but not central, problem of Ricoeur's phenomenology seems a risky task; risky because abstraction in Ricoeur functions just as an intermediary momentum, a methodological precaution, and in the end as forbearance, maybe even an 7 Ibid., pp. 3-4. 8 We are relatively aware of the major difficulties that we open with this attempt, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty, \"the most famous phenomenologist,\" as Ricoeur calls him, only confirms this fact: \"...no doubt that there hasn't existed a problem to which Husserl dedicated more time to understand himself, no other problem to which he returned more often.\" Fenomenologia Percepţiei, translated by Ilieş Câmpeanu and Georgiana Vătăjelu (Oradea: Aion, 1999), p. 9. 376 Cătălin Bobb impossibility to directly analyze the concepts it suspends. At the same time, some similarities between the two concepts cannot be doubted. If Husserlian reduction primarily aims at suspending the natural attitude of naivete, where our knowledge lives with us, then we may state that Ricoeurian reduction functions as suspending the naive attitude that our knowledge has regarding the concepts of fault and transcendence. But what kind of naivete are we talking about in regard to Ricoeur? Should we understand that there is a natural knowledge, a psychological naivete that speaks of fault and transcendence? What kind of knowledge is this about, the theological one, the philosophical one, or both? We cannot know; Ricoeur does not mention anything in relation to this. Another step: for Husserl, the eidetic reduction offers the beginning philosopher access to the origin of pure, transcendental subjectivity,9 and, on the contrary, this functions for Ricoeur the opposite way, in the very precise sense that access to the ultimate origin of subjectivity is suspended, bracketed, and inaccessible. That which is fundamental for Husserl is marginal for Ricoeur, although both philosophers only aim to understand and describe human subjectivity. It is obvious that for Husserl this is not the ultimate aim, but transcendental subjectivity functions as an indispensable pendant of a radically scientific philosophy. For Ricoeur, to understand and describe human subjectivity is the key to understanding the human person as such. An explanation must be provided immediately. The separation from Husserl is completely visible by now. Phenomenology does not provide the key to adequately understand subjectivity, but it does offer the key to adequately understand the fundamental structures of subjectivity: the voluntary and the involuntary. But of what kind of pure, transcendental description may we talk when the sublayer that supports this description is by no means pure and transcendental? More specifically, if the voluntary and the involuntary are the ultimate/primary structures of human will, and human will defines, however imperfectly, human subjectivity, then pure description should totally function over all the elements that compound human subjectivity, as well as over subjectivity as such. This does not happen in the case of Ricoeurian philosophy, and the reasons for such a \"deliberate failure\" of phenomenology still require explaining. The radicalism of the Husserlian task that we merely state here actually supposes a kind of absolute radicalism of the cogitant subject; that is, specifically, a subject that constitutes itself through itself in itself in the 9 \"Pure and/or transcendental phenomenology [...]; this science refers to a new field of experience, one belonging only to it, and that is transcendental subjectivity. [...] transcendental experience is possible only in a radical change [...] a change of attitude, which, as method of access to the transcendentalphenomenological scheme is called 'phenomenological reduction,'\" Edmund Husserl, Postfaţa la Idei pentru o fenomenologie pură şi o filosofie fenomenologică (1930) in Criza umanităţii europene şi filosofia, translated by Alexandru Boboc (Bucureşti: Paideia, 2003), p. 110. The Human Person between Transcendence and Fault 377 world, so that \"the objective world that exists for me, that has existed and will exist for me, this world together with all the objects within it, creates [...] its entire meaning and the whole validity of existence that it has in every moment for me from my very self, from myself as a transcendental ego that appears for the first time together with the transcendental phenomenological epoché.\"10 We are not interested in the incrimination regarding Husserlian solipsism, – in the end, even Husserl reacts11 rather brutally against his critics – but our interest exclusively regards the similarities between this constitutive reduction of the phenomenological transcendental subject and Ricoeur's reduction applied to transcendence and fault. It is useless to mark here Ricoeur's drama, that is, the obvious excluding of transcendence and fault in applying the Husserlian epoché, which never makes room for his central philosophical concepts. What Ricoeur produces by excluding from the beginning transcendence and fault is a bracketing, not of transcendence and fault, but of the ultimate origin of subjectivity as well as that particular something that profoundly alters subjectivity. Once more, Ricoeur does not exclude from the field of phenomenological analysis transcendence and fault, but excludes, in the end, human subjectivity with its two extremes: origin and alteration. The reasons for this exclusion are not in the least unclear; they are not even philosophical, but pertain to what the Christian Ricoeur feels \"inside his heart.\" We should not misunderstand this – Ricoeur does not confess to this, for it would be a philosophical disaster – but it is the only way we can understand the motives of the true excluding of fault and transcendence from the field of phenomenological analysis. But this does not mean that Ricoeur would have been completely aware that by giving up phenomenology, he would open up hermeneutics. The dangers that a purely phenomenological analysis would pose to the philosopher are much more important than the necessity of a new method. Thus, we may ask ourselves, without seeming to lack understanding, why is Ricoeur weary of phenomenologically attacking transcendence and fault? Why must we, from the beginning, bracket, eliminate, or abstract transcendence and fault? Can all this be about a methodological necessity, or, more likely, that the method produces harmful side effects to the concepts it wishes to analyze? Phenomenology, in its primary intention, wants nothing more than to scientifically substantiate sciences,12 that is, to humanly objectify – using a little word game – the objective. Such a wish must not be easily overlooked. We can find nothing more beneficial than 10 Edmund Husserl, Meditaţii carteziente, translated by Aurelian Crăiuţu (Bucureşti: Humanitas, 1994), p. 57. 11 Edmund Husserl, Postfaţa la Idei pentru o fenomenologie pură şi o filosofie fenomenologică, p. 108. 12 Let us listen to Husserl here: \"The idea that guides our meditations is that of a science that must be founded in a radical authenticity and, in the end, the idea of a universal science,\" Meditaţii carteziene, p. 37. 378 Cătălin Bobb objectifying fault and transcendence. Let us imagine we have at hand a method through which we can objectify \"the ultimate origin of subjectivity\" as well as that particular something \"which profoundly alters man's intelligibility.\" Could this be an unexpected chance that philosophy receives? No, on the contrary, Ricoeur tells us this exactly the place of the necessity to bracket, especially because of the fact that phenomenology has as its justifying pretension the objectivization. We are not talking about the shortcomings of Husserlian phenomenology (intersubjectivity, ontology, etc.) and the whole post-Husserlian tradition as Ricoeur understands it, but the fact that the fundamental intention of phenomenology must not be taken into consideration. We should not endlessly speculate in regard to Ricoeur's decision that phenomenology cannot work its primary intention, and this we must understand as such. But there are precautions again, and we may ask ourselves why. What are the phenomenological motives, causes, and reasoning that impose such a decision? Unfortunately, Ricoeur does not offer answers for these questions, and our own interpretation cannot be presently put into application. We shall cautiously wait for the second part of this paper. FAULT Erazim V. Kohak, famous Czech phenomenologist and the translator of Freedom and Nature into English, writes an introduction entitled The Philosophy of Paul Ricoeur. And truly, we are faced with more than a simple introduction; it is an almost exhaustive explanation of the mechanisms (as an index) that build the philosophy of will (Kohak does not stop here; he also integrates Fallible Man and The Symbolism of Evil). For Kohak, transcendence and fault remain central concepts in Freedom and Nature. Nonetheless, it seems odd to state that the central concepts of a work are concepts that are not discussed much at all. In fact, they occupy a central role through their marginality, not in the sense that they are being evacuated, which actually happens, but that they are the extreme margins that frame the entire philosophy of will; between transcendence and fault, will is manifesting. The multiple versants that human will must pass over are framed, limited as ultimate margins by transcendence and fault. Will remains entrapped in a perpetual road that cannot surpass its own limits, within a phenomenological analysis, given by transcendence and fault. To go beyond, to aim a beyond intentionality, means to go outside of phenomenology to be able to bring into discussion exactly what phenomenology cannot talk about. It means, in lesser and much simpler words, telling phenomenology that it fails exactly where things are essential,13 slightly forcing things, we might say, exactly where things are 13 We offer here Merleau-Ponty's answer to his own question: \"What is phenomenology? [...] Phenomenology is the study of essences and, according to it, the entire problem pertains to defining essences; the essence of perception, The Human Person between Transcendence and Fault 379 eidetic. It may seem absurd to bring into debate the central concepts of Freedom and Nature, as long as they are central through their absence. But what stops us from seeing them working where they are not? This is not a word game. If the index of will (the fundamental structures) may be analyzed only by disregarding transcendence and fault, it means that the movements within will, either voluntary or involuntary, are movements determined exactly by the limits that transcendence and fault impose. When Kohak speaks of fault, he insists on telling us that \"this term reflects Ricoeur's basic intuition of a world out of kilter, of basic disruption marking all existence. In conversation, Ricoeur has stated that he had sought the most neutral term which would express this sense of radical disruption.\"14 The process of translation, Kohak confesses, obligates him to remove from the concept of fault \"any theological connotation\" that may be there. Here we encounter a delicate problem of Ricoeur's philosophy: where do philosophy and theology meet, and where do they separate? If we are to take into account the version Kohak unveils for us, we will say that \"the theological connotation of 'fall' proves unsupportable.\"15 Fault here is not imbued with any theological fragrance. Thus, Kohak tells us, we may use the concepts of fall, disruption, corruption, and rupture, and all of them, in different ways, would be synonymous to the concept of fault. The exacerbated care that Kohak shows while trying to convince us of the theological impossibility of the concept of fault makes us think. The text itself (Freedom and Nature) is not as convincing as Kohak! There are enough elements that would disagree with Kohak when listening (in conversation!) – over-piously, we may add – to Ricoeur. Of course, as in the case of any philosophical work, it is to be avoided by any means to be engaged in any theologically-favorable discussion, but, under the principle of textual honesty, we have to admit that things are not really as clear as Kohak sees them. POETICS OF THE WILL Eliminating passions from the phenomenological description of will actually acts as a recoil. The abstraction (elimination) of fault and transcendence functions only as a procedure chosen by Ricoeur for reasons unclear. In fact, the limit of analysis suggested by Ricoeur encounters passions (fault) exactly at the heart, if we may call it that, of an ontological project. The main reason Ricoeur asks for ontology of will is human existence as \"meaning.\" The meaning to which we refer is represented by the human subject, which, through its fundamental acts (I want, decide, and the essence of conscience for example,\" in Merleau-Ponty, Fenomenologia Percepţiei, p. 5. 14 Erazim V. Kohak, \"The Philosophy of Paul Ricoeur\" in Paul Ricoeur, Freedom and Nature, xxxix. 15 Ibid. 380 Cătălin Bobb consent) constitutes itself. Unfortunately, the distortions that constantly attack the consistency of a transcendental self are always up and ready to dissolve the radicalism of the self. Ricoeur calls these distortions passions (ambition, gluttony, hatred, vanity, etc). An ontological project that would therefore start in reverse – not from the fundamental structures of the self, but from the fundamental passions – is a pat answer that seems at least promising. In the end, Ricoeur gives up his attempt to place his analysis in nobody's will and attempts to create, on the basis of an empirical will, an ontology. At this point, Ricoeur's project becomes at least unnatural. In Freedom and Nature, Ricoeur warns us from the very beginning that his research on will shall not include a study of ambition or hatred. This is not because these are not part of the mechanism through which, for example, we hate, but precisely because these entities are \"ordinary,\" \"concrete,\" and \"real.\" The relentless reality of hatred, the fact that it exists in everyone's daily life precisely through its objectivity, dismisses the possibility of an eidetic analysis. In fact, these passions, as Ricoeur calls them, cannot be analyzed because they corrupt the neutral (pure) mode of the existence of the voluntary and the involuntary aspects of our freedom.16 Moreover, the necessity to ignore these passions is required by the fundamental structures of the human will (to act, choose, and consent). Of course, this is about a philosophy of the yes against the originary and obscure negativity that dwells within us. It is an ontology lacking the elementary deficiencies of our nature. Against these barbaric negativities (hatred, ambition, etc.) that are inscribed in the reality of our existence, a philosophy of originary affirmation eidetically described is required. Such a task seems to be against existentialist philosophy, which found negativity to be the distinctive marker of our existence. Against the existentialist no – the Ricoeurian yes. The problem is that this \"yes\" is placed outside of experience, outside the concrete possibilities of human action. How is that? Ricoeur tells us that the possibility of a discussion on will outside the law-morality scheme exists. \"The will is, fundamentally, the ability to receive and approve values. But the willing-value nexus remains an abstraction and does not introduce us to concrete moral reality (...) it provides only a basis for the possibility of a principle of morality in general. Real, concrete understanding of morality begins with passions.\"17 The elimination of passions as founding events of concrete morality in a phenomenological description of will does nothing more than subscribe to the same logic of the abstraction of fault. Will, in this scheme, belongs to nobody, but it is a significant, essential, fundamental nobody. 16 Paul Ricoeur, Freedom and Nature, p. 20. 17 Ibid., p. 21. The Human Person between Transcendence and Fault 381 Paradoxically, a while later, Ricoeur changes the registry: \"Secondary reflection18 assures passage from a transcendental phenomenology to a ontological phenomenology.19 In this case, our problem is to show the mere possibilities of a phenomenology of a will which transforms itself into an ontology of will...thru passions.\"20 Introducing these passions as elements that open a possible ontological phenomenology cannot at this time do anything more than amaze. Of course, it won't be long until he publishes Fallible Man (1960), but this article produces not only the stupefaction of contradiction, but also the path to a new method. If eliminating passions (ambition, hatred, gluttony, etc.) seemed the ultimate condition to open the path toward an ontology of will, because these elements corrupt the pure mode of being of will, the total inversion of the analysis seems unnatural. But the area where freedom moved even prior to history, as Ricoeur describes it in Freedom and Nature, is ineffable; ineffable in the sense of action, not utterableness, which means an action that has no equivalent in reality. Of course, the necessity to create fundamental structures of the human will requires such ineffability. But this retrieving ontology situated at the edge of reality must open up toward a phenomenology of passions to be able to function. But, as a principle, a phenomenology of passions that excludes fault is impossible. In spite of this, Ricoeur tells us that a phenomenology of passions can exist as a \"philosophical reflection on culpability.\"21 Let us see how ambition, gluttony, hatred, etc., can work as openers for a phenomenological ontology. Proximity with the elements excluded from a phenomenological description is produced precisely by the reality of our existence, \"the human ethos in its whole,\" expressed through literature and history: \"do passions not represent the ordinary figure of will, regarding which the functions of the voluntary and the involuntary are nothing more than abstractions, like a skeleton, a bone structure without meat?\" Ricoeur rhetorically asks. That is, of course, true, but the multiplicity of figures that ambition, gluttony, hatred, etc., presents annihilates the possibility of a unifying principle so dear to a phenomenological description. The only way to talk about these elements of nonentity, or existential precariousness, as Ricoeur calls them, is the myth. It is true that the engine of literature and history may function fueled by ambition, gluttony, and hatred, but only 18 Secondary reflection walks in the shadow of secondary naivete. If there is a naive philosophy completely tributary to natural sciences that Husserl was trying to overcome, there is a second naivete of Husserlian philosophy against which Ricoeur builds his task. Paul Ricoeur, La şcoala fenomenologiei , translated by Paul Marinescu (Bucureşti: Humanitas, 2007), p. 190. 19At the moment Ricoeur speaks about a phenomenological ontology against transcendental phenomenology, he has in mind overcoming Husserl's egology with what he calls an ontology of will. 20 Paul Ricoeur, La şcoala fenomenologiei, p. 90. 21 Ibid. 382 Cătălin Bobb myth can account for their unity in the rational explanation that philosophical thought requires. This is how the myth is in game – the exponential myth, the unifying of passion is the myth of the Fall. The transition from the impossibility of unification to a structure of signification of passions such as ambition, gluttony, and hatred from a phenomenological description to a mythical description due to the lack of a unifying principle that only the myth of the Fall possesses makes us think. For Ricoeur, \"passion\" is formed around an \"intentional nothing\" that can be also found in \"suspicion,\" \"reproach,\" \"insult,\" \"wrath,\" etc. The name of this \"particular nothing\" is represented in the myth by the images of \"darkness,\" \"profound abyss,\" \"perversion,\" \"and enslavement.\" It is about an intentional nothing that phenomenology cannot comprehend, so this task is exclusively assigned to the myth. The problem appears when Ricoeur admits that this particular nothing \"revives the movement of history, projecting man toward welfare and power, setting the basis of economy and politics.\" Thus, the task of phenomenology, as a description of the ultimate structures of the human, is seriously threatened: threatened to describe something lacking reality, lacking, in Ricoeur's words, \"meat.\" The requirement is the simultaneous elaboration of an empirical theory and a mythical theory of will. But before we get to an empirical description, and respectively to a mythical description, let us remain enwrapped in the intention that moves phenomenological ontology. The elimination of passions produces an advantage as well as a disadvantage: advantage, \"because it emphasizes will and human existence in general as that which gives meaning;22 disadvantage, because there is \"an ontological loss\" provided by the negative access to the being of will through passion. So there is a reverse way, a way that should bracket \"the fundamental structures\" of will, a negative way which, through its negativity, would discover the ontological structure of will. The passion that Ricoeur offers as an example is vanity: vanity as an accessway, while, at the same time, as a distortion. \"The omission of being seems connected to the dissimulation that enslaved freedom oozes; the ego's vanity is spread like a veil over the very being of its existence.\"23 Is it an enslaved, subdued freedom? Why would that be? Because pure freedom does not exist; freedom is completely the creation of passions. Once the path to freedom is opened by vanity, we can access the being of freedom (of will). But the question remains, how can we access the \"being of will,\" the \"being of man,\" through vanity? The answer is: through a \"poetic of the will.\" More specifically, the answer through and against ambition, gluttony, vanity, etc., is in the power of a poetic of the will. What such a poetic means and how it can be described remains without answer. Ricoeur will never return to this topic. Romanian Academy, Iaşi, Romania, catalinbobb@yahoo.com 22 Ibid, p. 94. 23 Ibid., p. 97. CHAPTER XXXI FOUCAULT'S CASE AGAINST HUMANISM MARIA GIOGA Abstract: Like many of the \"–ism\" words, humanism is a concept which is as widely used as it is indeterminate. In the English-speaking world, it is often associated with an optimistic and secular view of the world, and asserts the privilege of human beings over non-organic (or organic but nonhuman) entities, defending the rights of human beings to happiness and to the development of their individual potential. Yet in France and Germany, at the time of the \"death of man,\" humanism was seen by many as a dirty word, partly because of its implied anthropocentrism, and partly due to some dubious political associations. Although you can't find much uniformity in the anti-humanist camp (such as Foucault, Levi-Strauss, Althusser, and Lacan), they all denied the primacy of man, be it as an epistemological starting point (the subject as the foundation of all possible knowledge, as in Husserlian phenomenology) or as a practical agent (as in Hegelian history). Correlatively, they emphasized the part played by unconscious structures in the determination of thought and behavior. For example, the \"author\" was redefined by Foucault as a function of texts rather than their source; Althusser redescribed human agents as bearers of historical determination, not as the actors of history, etc. Throughout this paper I will focus on Michel Foucault's understanding and use of the term. We can distinguish (as Alexander Fraser does) between three possible grounds for Foucault's rejection of humanism: 1) conceptual or philosophical (humanism as too entangled in Western subject-focused metaphysics); 2) strategic (the appeal to humanist values as covering up strategies of domination); or 3) normative (humanism as being intrinsically objectionable, on the grounds that subjection is per se a form of subjugation). These three possibilities are supposed to correspond to three main stages of Foucault's philosophical development (archaeology, genealogy, and the history of subjectivity). The strongest point in Foucault's rejection of humanism is conceptual: it was motivated by his philosophical analyses of the aporia of the anthropological turn and the analytic of finitude. But if Foucault entails that there is no human essence which is ahistorical and universal, does that mean that he rejects the possibility of human rights? In this paper, I will summarize Foucault's arguments against humanism, and I will try to place them into the contemporary debate about the human essence. The purpose of my paper is to show that Foucault doesn't advocate against human rights as some critics have argued. No, Foucault's anti-humanism is entirely consistent with an orientation to human rights that does not tend to supply them a metaphysical ground. I think that Foucault has a pragmatic approach to the human rights problem. He does 384 Maria Gioga not deny them and does not reject the necessity of them, but says that human rights need to be historically and pragmatically determined. In other words, Foucault is saying that we can not supply a metaphysical ground for human rights, because there is no human essence; but they are good, for those human values help us fight the power of governments, so let us use them. In this way, we should read a remark he made in an interview: \"There exists today an international citizenship that has its rights and duties.\" So we should see Foucault's anti-humanism as undercutting only the modernist notion of the subject, but much of the core of humanist values can be retained. Keywords: human rights, Foucault, humanism, Kant, biopower. We can distinguish (as Alexander Fraser does) three possible grounds for Michel Foucault's rejection of humanism: 1) conceptual or philosophical (humanism as too entagled in Western subject-focused metaphysics); 2) strategic (the appeal to humanist values as covering up strategies of domination); 3) normative (humanism as being intrinsically objectionable, on the grounds that subjection is per se a form of subjugation). These three possibilities are supposed to correspond to three main stages of Foucault's philosophical development (archaeology, genealogy, and the history of subjectivity). The strongest point in Foucault's rejection of humanism is conceptual: it was motivated by his philosophical analyses of the aporia of the anthropological turn and the analytic of finitude. Humanism is strictly linked to the birth of man, which appeared at the start of modernity. The birth of man is due to the Copernican turn, whereby the focus shifted from representations to the representing subject. In Immanuel Kant's work, \"man appeared as an object of possible knowledge...and at the same time as the being through which all knowledge is possible.\"1 The possibility of anthropology (the study of man) was brought up by Kant, who, in his Anthropology, focused on finitude, rather than on the the infinite. \"From Kant onward there is nothing but finitude, and it is in this sense that Kantian critique carried with it the possibility of anthropology.\"2 Foucault points out that during the Classical Age, the notion of the infinite was both central and primary; thus, for René Descartes, one can prove the existence of God by the presence of the idea of the infinite in the finite. The underlying assumption is that the infinite has ontological preeminence over the finite. So, during the Classical Age, the finite stands in a relationship of ontological subordination to and logical 1 M. Foucault, Introduction to Kant's Anthropology (Los Angeles, CA.: Semiotext, 2008), p. 110. 2 Ibid., p. 100. Foucault`s Case Against Humanism 385 derivation from the infinite. By contrast, for Foucault, the hallmark of the anthropological turn is that human finitude, instead being subordinated to God's infinity, becomes self-foundational: \"Modern culture can conceive of man because it conceives of the finite on the basis of itself.\"3 But, although Kant's \"analytic of finitude\" made possible the sciences of man as well as humanism, man was placed in an unstable position as both the subject and object of knowledge. Hence, man emerges in the \"analytic of finitude\" introduced by Kant as a \"strange empiricotranscendental doublet,\"4 because he is both the object of knowledge (that about which knowledge seeks to know) and the subject of knowledge (that which strives after such knowledge). Such a humanism introduces radical instabilities into the human sciences. This is leading Foucault to think that there are fundamental incompatibilities in the concepts of what man is and in the nature of modernist knowledge. Humanism, as Foucault understood it, exhausts itself in an endless back and forth from one side to the other of man and his doubles: from man as the condition for the possibility of knowledge to man as himself an object in the empirical field; from man's attempt to become intelligible to himself by making accessible the unthought that always eludes him because it is that which makes thought possible; from man's curious relationship with his history as historical and what makes history possible in which his origin always retreats. Humanism, or the analytic of finitude, then, is \"warped and twisted forms of reflection,\" and all those forms of reflection that take man as the starting point, that talk of man's liberation, and that attempt to reach the truth about man are caught in the futility of the doubles. Humanism claims that man exists at the center of the universe as a finite being who can reason within limits, and beyond which limits he cannot go. Such a notion generates insoluble contradictions for the human sciences because it is based on incompatible conceptions of what man, his history, and mind are. Foucault5 traces the play of these contradictions as they have emerged alongside the empirical human sciences. Hence on one hand, our knowledge must be limited, as man knows himself as a finite being, as an objective of nature; on the other hand, that finitude which establishes the limits of human understanding is claimed to be the condition that makes knowledge of this finitude possible. Hence the possibility of knowledge is established on limits to reason which deny it. This is not the only problem that Foucault sees in the humanist conception. Humanism refers to the philosophical centrality or priority of the subject whose rational capacities, which are asocial and ahistorical, serve as a foundation anchoring objectivity and truth. As Alexander Fraser states, humanism \"is the project of making the subject pole triumph over 3 Ibid., p. 85. 4 Ibid., p. 90. 5 M. Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (London: Tavistock Publications, 1970), pp. 216-230. 386 Maria Gioga the object pole,\"6 representing man as constitutor, as free, as all-knowing, and as master of his fate and destiny. Foucault's conception of the subject, influenced by Friedrich Nietzsche, sees it as having no unity, essence, or integral identity. For Foucault, the unresolved tension of Kant's philosophical project is that he fails to appreciate the contingent and historically contextualized character of all truth-claims, (that is, to advocate a notion of critique which claims to transcend specific historical conditions through the exercise of cognitive faculties – of understanding, reason, and judgment – deduced a priori as timeless structures). The transcendental character of Kant's argument resides in positing a priori categories, which are deduced to constitute the consciousness of the human subject as that which organizes perception as a timeless and universal structure. In this sense, Foucault rejects Kant's claims to have established the universal grounds for the conditions of possibility of human knowledge, and Kant's claims for transcendental reason are replaced for Foucault by a principle of permanent contingency. By extension, Foucault disputes Kant's claim to have established a secure foundation by which to differentiate different types of knowledge claims, relating to science, practical reason, or aesthetics. The objective is to switch from a conception of critique as being transcendentally grounded to a conception of critique which conceives of itself as practical and historically specific. Thus Foucault says: \"Criticism is no longer going to be practiced in the search for formal structures with universal value, but rather as an historical investigation into the events that have led us to constitute ourselves and to recognize ourselves as subjects of what we are doing, thinking, and saying.\"7 Next, Foucault adapts Kant to support his socio-historical concept, through which individuals are constituted in relation to a world of alreadygiven practices of a determinate historical terrain. This is one of Foucault's central points: the human being has nothing which is essential or ahistorical, but everything is produced in the limits of a episteme (the total set of relations that unite, at a given period, the discursive practices that give rise to epistemological figures, sciences, and possibly formalized systems of knowledge). For example, man is a central figure only in our episteme, which is no more than two centuries old, so we can say that he is only a recent invention. We tend to see man as originary to all things because the structures of our episteme are entailing this view, but that does not mean that he is fundamental; being a mere concept derivated from the structures of our episteme, man will disappear together with our episteme. This can be seen already with the dissolution of subject, which characterizes the present. 6 N. Fraser, Foucault on Modern Power: Empirical Insights and Normative Confusions, Cambridge Companion to Foucault (Cambridge: Cambridge Press, 2005), p. 191. 7 M. Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (London: Tavistock Publications, 1970), p. 302. Foucault`s Case Against Humanism 387 The third argument and final against humanism is that it represents a mode of indirect domination. This point is based on Foucault's theory about power. The slogan of humanism is: \"Even though you do not exercise power, you can still be a ruler.\" In the humanist view, the more you deny yourself the exercise of power, the more you submit to those in power, and then the more this increases your sovereignty. Humanism invented a whole series of subjected sovereignties: the soul (ruling the body, but subjected to God), consciousness (sovereign in a contest of judgment, but subjected to the necessities of truth), the individual (a titular control of personal rights subjected to the laws of nature and society), basic freedom (sovereign within, but accepting the demands of an outside world and \"aligned with destiny\"). In short, humanism is everything in Western civilization that restricts the desire for power: it prohibits the desire for power and excludes the possibility of power being seized. This view makes possible autocratic governments and tyranny in the Western world. Instead of this diminishment of human being, Foucault proposes a thoroughly contingent human, one which is always open to reinterpretation: \"Men have never ceased to construct themselves...to continually displace their subjectivity, to constitute themselves in an infinite, multiple series of different subjectivities that will never have an end and will never bring us into the presence of something that would be \"man.\"8 But, if Foucault entails that there is no human essence which is ahistorical and universal, does that mean that he rejects the possibility of human rights? No, Foucault's anti-humanism is entirely consistent with an orientation to human rights that does not tend to provide them with a metaphysical ground. I think that Foucault has a pragmatic approach to the human rights problem. He does not deny them and does not reject their necessity, but says that human rights need to be historically and pragmatically determined. In other words, Foucault is saying that we can not supply a metaphysical ground to human rights because there is no human essence; but they are good, and those human values help us fight the power of governments, so let us use them. In this way, we should read a remark he made in an interview: \"There exists today an international citizenship that has its rights and duties.\"9 So, we should see Foucault's anti-humanism as undercutting only the modernist notion of the subject, while much of the core of humanist values can be retained. Faculty of Philosophy University of Bucharest Bucharest, Romania myra_g5@yahoo.com 8 Foucault, M., Power: Essential works of Foucault 1954-1984 (NY: The New Press, 2000), p. 274. 9 Ibid., p. 405.\n\nTHE COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN VALUES AND PHILOSOPHY PURPOSE Today there is urgent need to attend to the nature and dignity of the person, to the quality of human life, to the purpose and goal of the physical transformation of our environment, and to the relation of all this to the development of social and political life. This, in turn, requires philosophic clarification of the base upon which freedom is exercised, that is, of the values which provide stability and guidance to one's decisions. Such studies must be able to reach deeply into one's culture and that of other parts of the world as mutually reinforcing and enriching in order to uncover the roots of the dignity of persons and of their societies. They must be able to identify the conceptual forms in terms of which modern industrial and technological developments are structured and how these impact upon human self-understanding. Above all, they must be able to bring these elements together in the creative understanding essential for setting our goals and determining our modes of interaction. In the present complex global circumstances this is a condition for growing together with trust and justice, honest dedication and mutual concern. The Council for Studies in Values and Philosophy (RVP) unites scholars who share these concerns and are interested in the application thereto of existing capabilities in the field of philosophy and other disciplines. Its work is to identify areas in which study is needed, the intellectual resources which can be brought to bear thereupon, and the means for publication and interchange of the work from the various regions of the world. In bringing these together its goal is scientific discovery and publication which contributes to the present promotion of humankind. In sum, our times present both the need and the opportunity for deeper and ever more progressive understanding of the person and of the foundations of social life. The development of such understanding is the goal of the RVP. PROJECTS A set of related research efforts is currently in process: 1. Cultural Heritage and Contemporary Change: Philosophical Foundations for Social Life. Focused, mutually coordinated research teams in university centers prepare volumes as part of an integrated philosophic search for self-understanding differentiated by culture and civilization. These evolve more adequate understandings of the person in society and look to the cultural heritage of each for the resources to respond to the challenges of its own specific contemporary transformation. 398 Publications 2. Seminars on Culture and Contemporary Issues. This series of 10 week crosscultural and interdisciplinary seminars is coordinated by the RVP in Washington. 3. Joint-Colloquia with Institutes of Philosophy of the National Academies of Science, university philosophy departments, and societies. Underway since 1976 in Eastern Europe and, since 1987, in China, these concern the person in contemporary society. 4. Foundations of Moral Education and Character Development. A study in values and education which unites philosophers, psychologists, social scientists and scholars in education in the elaboration of ways of enriching the moral content of education and character development. This work has been underway since 1980. The personnel for these projects consists of established scholars willing to contribute their time and research as part of their professional commitment to life in contemporary society. For resources to implement this work the Council, as 501 C3 a non-profit organization incorporated in the District of Colombia, looks to various private foundations, public programs and enterprises. PUBLICATIONS ON CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONTEMPORARY CHANGE Series I. Culture and Values Series II. African Philosophical Studies Series IIA. Islamic Philosophical Studies Series III. Asian Philosophical Studies Series IV. Western European Philosophical Studies Series IVA. Central and Eastern European Philosophical Studies Series V. Latin American Philosophical Studies Series VI. Foundations of Moral Education Series VII. Seminars: Culture and Values Series VIII. Christian Philosophical Studies ************************************************************ CULTURAL HERITAGE AND CONTEMPORARY CHANGE Series I. Culture and Values I.1 Research on Culture and Values: Intersection of Universities, Churches and Nations. George F. McLean, ed. ISBN 0819173533 (paper); 081917352-5 (cloth). I.2 The Knowledge of Values: A Methodological Introduction to the Study of Values; A. Lopez Quintas, ed. ISBN 081917419x (paper); 0819174181 (cloth). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 399 I.3 Reading Philosophy for the XXIst Century. George F. McLean, ed. ISBN 0819174157 (paper); 0819174149 (cloth). I.4 Relations between Cultures. John A. Kromkowski, ed. ISBN 1565180089 (paper); 1565180097 (cloth). I.5 Urbanization and Values. John A. Kromkowski, ed. ISBN 1565180100 (paper); 1565180119 (cloth). I.6 The Place of the Person in Social Life. Paul Peachey and John A. Kromkowski, eds. ISBN 1565180127 (paper); 156518013-5 (cloth). I.7 Abrahamic Faiths, Ethnicity and Ethnic Conflicts. Paul Peachey, George F. McLean and John A. Kromkowski, eds. ISBN 1565181042 (paper). I.8 Ancient Western Philosophy: The Hellenic Emergence. George F. McLean and Patrick J. Aspell, eds. ISBN 156518100X (paper). I.9 Medieval Western Philosophy: The European Emergence. Patrick J. Aspell, ed. ISBN 1565180941 (paper). I.10 The Ethical Implications of Unity and the Divine in Nicholas of Cusa. David L. De Leonardis. ISBN 1565181123 (paper). I.11 Ethics at the Crossroads: 1.Normative Ethics and Objective Reason. George F. McLean, ed. ISBN 1565180224 (paper). I.12 Ethics at the Crossroads: 2. Personalist Ethics and Human Subjectivity. George F. McLean, ed. ISBN 1565180240 (paper). I.13 The Emancipative Theory of Jürgen Habermas and Metaphysics. Robert Badillo. ISBN 1565180429 (paper); 1565180437 (cloth). I.14 The Deficient Cause of Moral Evil According to Thomas Aquinas. Edward Cook. ISBN 1565180704 (paper). I.15 Human Love: Its Meaning and Scope, a Phenomenology of Gift and Encounter. Alfonso Lopez Quintas. ISBN 1565180747 (paper). I.16 Civil Society and Social Reconstruction. George F. McLean, ed. ISBN 1565180860 (paper). I.17 Ways to God, Personal and Social at the Turn of Millennia: The Iqbal Lecture, Lahore. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181239 (paper). I.18 The Role of the Sublime in Kant's Moral Metaphysics. John R. Goodreau. ISBN 1565181247 (paper). I.19 Philosophical Challenges and Opportunities of Globalization. Oliva Blanchette, Tomonobu Imamichi and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565181298 (paper). I.20 Faith, Reason and Philosophy: Lectures at The al-Azhar, Qom, Tehran, Lahore and Beijing; Appendix: The Encyclical Letter: Fides et Ratio. George F. McLean. ISBN 156518130 (paper). I.21 Religion and the Relation between Civilizations: Lectures on Cooperation between Islamic and Christian Cultures in a Global Horizon. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181522 (paper). I.22 Freedom, Cultural Traditions and Progress: Philosophy in Civil Society and Nation Building, Tashkent Lectures, 1999. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181514 (paper). 400 Publications I.23 Ecology of Knowledge. Jerzy A. Wojciechowski. ISBN 1565181581 (paper). I.24 God and the Challenge of Evil: A Critical Examination of Some Serious Objections to the Good and Omnipotent God. John L. Yardan. ISBN 1565181603 (paper). I.25 Reason, Rationality and Reasonableness, Vietnamese Philosophical Studies, I. Tran Van Doan. ISBN 1565181662 (paper). I.26 The Culture of Citizenship: Inventing Postmodern Civic Culture. Thomas Bridges. ISBN 1565181689 (paper). I.27 The Historicity of Understanding and the Problem of Relativism in Gadamer's Philosophical Hermeneutics. Osman Bilen. ISBN 1565181670 (paper). I.28 Speaking of God. Carlo Huber. ISBN 1565181697 (paper). I.29 Persons, Peoples and Cultures in a Global Age: Metaphysical Bases for Peace between Civilizations. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181875 (paper). I.30 Hermeneutics, Tradition and Contemporary Change: Lectures in Chennai/Madras, India. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181883 (paper). I.31 Husserl and Stein. Richard Feist and William Sweet, eds. ISBN 1565181948 (paper). I.32 Paul Hanly Furfey's Quest for a Good Society. Bronislaw Misztal, Francesco Villa, and Eric Sean Williams, eds. ISBN 1565182278 (paper). I.33 Three Theories of Society. Paul Hanly Furfey. ISBN 9781565182288 (paper). I.34 Building Peace in Civil Society: An Autobiographical Report from a Believers' Church. Paul Peachey. ISBN 9781565182325 (paper). I.35 Karol Wojtyla's Philosophical Legacy. Agnes B. Curry, Nancy Mardas and George F. McLean ,eds. ISBN 9781565182479 (paper). I.36 Kantian Form and Phenomenological Force: Kant's Imperatives and the Directives of Contemporary Phenomenology. Randolph C. Wheeler. ISBN 9781565182547 (paper). I.37 Beyond Modernity: The Recovery of Person and Community in Global Times: Lectures in China and Vietnam. George F. McLean. ISBN 9781565182578 (paper) I. 38 Religion and Culture. George F. McLean. ISBN 9781565182561 (paper). I.39 The Dialogue of Cultural Traditions: Global Perspective. William Sweet, George F. McLean, Tomonobu Imamichi, Safak Ural, O. Faruk Akyol, eds. ISBN 9781565182585 (paper). I.40 Unity and Harmony, Love and Compassion in Global Times. George F. McLean. ISBN 9781565182592 (paper). I.41 Intercultural Dialogue and Human Rights. Luigi Bonanate, Roberto Papini and William Sweet, eds. ISBN 9781565182714 (paper). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 401 I.42 Philosophy Emerging from Culture. William Sweet, George F. McLean, Oliva Blanchette, Wonbin Park, eds. ISBN 9781565182851 (paper). I.43 Whence Intelligibility? Louis Perron, ed. ISBN 9781565182905 (paper). Series II. African Philosophical Studies II.1 Person and Community: Ghanaian Philosophical Studies: I. Kwasi Wiredu and Kwame Gyekye, eds. ISBN 1565180046 (paper); 1565180054 (cloth). II.2 The Foundations of Social Life: Ugandan Philosophical Studies: I. A.T. Dalfovo, ed. ISBN 1565180062 (paper); 156518007-0 (cloth). II.3 Identity and Change in Nigeria: Nigerian Philosophical Studies, I. Theophilus Okere, ed. ISBN 1565180682 (paper). II.4 Social Reconstruction in Africa: Ugandan Philosophical studies, II. E. Wamala, A.R. Byaruhanga, A.T. Dalfovo, J.K. Kigongo, S.A. Mwanahewa and G. Tusabe, eds. ISBN 1565181182 (paper). II.5 Ghana: Changing Values/Changing Technologies: Ghanaian Philosophical Studies, II. Helen Lauer, ed. ISBN 1565181441 (paper). II.6 Sameness and Difference: Problems and Potentials in South African Civil Society: South African Philosophical Studies, I. James R.Cochrane and Bastienne Klein, eds. ISBN 1565181557 (paper). II.7 Protest and Engagement: Philosophy after Apartheid at an Historically Black South African University: South African Philosophical Studies, II. Patrick Giddy, ed. ISBN 1565181638 (paper). II.8 Ethics, Human Rights and Development in Africa: Ugandan Philosophical Studies, III. A.T. Dalfovo, J.K. Kigongo, J. Kisekka, G. Tusabe, E. Wamala, R. Munyonyo, A.B. Rukooko, A.B.T. Byaruhanga-akiiki, and M. Mawa, eds. ISBN 1565181727 (paper). II.9 Beyond Cultures: Perceiving a Common Humanity: Ghanaian Philosophical Studies, III. Kwame Gyekye. ISBN 156518193X (paper). II.10 Social and Religious Concerns of East African: A Wajibu Anthology: Kenyan Philosophical Studies, I. Gerald J. Wanjohi and G. Wakuraya Wanjohi, eds. ISBN 1565182219 (paper). II.11 The Idea of an African University: The Nigerian Experience: Nigerian Philosophical Studies, II. Joseph Kenny, ed. ISBN 9781565182301 (paper). II.12 The Struggles after the Struggle: Zimbabwean Philosophical Study, I. David Kaulemu, ed. ISBN 9781565182318 (paper). II.13 Indigenous and Modern Environmental Ethics: A Study of the Indigenous Oromo Environmental Ethic and Modern Issues of Environment and Development: Ethiopian Philosophical Studies, I. Workineh Kelbessa. ISBN 9781565182530 (paper). 402 Publications II.14 African Philosophy and the Future of Africa: South African Philosophical Studies, III. Gerard Walmsley, ed. ISMB 9781565182707 (paper). II.15 Philosophy in Ethiopia: African Philosophy Today, I: Ethiopian Philosophical Studies, II. Bekele Gutema and Charles C. Verharen, eds. ISBN 9781565182790 (paper). II.16 The Idea of a Nigerian University: A Revisited: Nigerian Philosophical Studies, III. Olatunji Oyeshile and Joseph Kenny, eds. ISBN 9781565182776 (paper). Series IIA. Islamic Philosophical Studies IIA.1 Islam and the Political Order. Muhammad Saïd al-Ashmawy. ISBN ISBN 156518047X (paper); 156518046-1 (cloth). IIA.2 Al-Ghazali Deliverance from Error and Mystical Union with the Almighty: Al-munqidh Min al-Dadāl. Critical Arabic edition and English translation by Muhammad Abulaylah and Nurshif AbdulRahim Rifat; Introduction and notes by George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181530 (Arabic-English edition, paper), ISBN 1565180828 (Arabic edition, paper), ISBN 156518081X (English edition, paper) IIA.3 Philosophy in Pakistan. Naeem Ahmad, ed. ISBN 1565181085 (paper). IIA.4 The Authenticity of the Text in Hermeneutics. Seyed Musa Dibadj. ISBN 1565181174 (paper). IIA.5 Interpretation and the Problem of the Intention of the Author: H.-G. Gadamer vs E.D. Hirsch. Burhanettin Tatar. ISBN 156518121 (paper). IIA.6 Ways to God, Personal and Social at the Turn of Millennia: The Iqbal Lectures, Lahore. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181239 (paper). IIA.7 Faith, Reason and Philosophy: Lectures at Al-Azhar University, Qom, Tehran, Lahore and Beijing; Appendix: The Encyclical Letter: Fides et Ratio. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181301 (paper). IIA.8 Islamic and Christian Cultures: Conflict or Dialogue: Bulgarian Philosophical Studies, III. Plament Makariev, ed. ISBN 156518162X (paper). IIA.9 Values of Islamic Culture and the Experience of History, Russian Philosophical Studies, I. Nur Kirabaev, Yuriy Pochta, eds. ISBN 1565181336 (paper). IIA.10 Christian-Islamic Preambles of Faith. Joseph Kenny. ISBN 1565181387 (paper). IIA.11 The Historicity of Understanding and the Problem of Relativism in Gadamer's Philosophical Hermeneutics. Osman Bilen. ISBN 1565181670 (paper). IIA.12 Religion and the Relation between Civilizations: Lectures on Cooperation between Islamic and Christian Cultures in a Global Horizon. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181522 (paper). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 403 IIA.13 Modern Western Christian Theological Understandings of Muslims since the Second Vatican Council. Mahmut Aydin. ISBN 1565181719 (paper). IIA.14 Philosophy of the Muslim World; Authors and Principal Themes. Joseph Kenny. ISBN 1565181794 (paper). IIA.15 Islam and Its Quest for Peace: Jihad, Justice and Education. Mustafa Köylü. ISBN 1565181808 (paper). IIA.16 Islamic Thought on the Existence of God: Contributions and Contrasts with Contemporary Western Philosophy of Religion. Cafer S. Yaran. ISBN 1565181921 (paper). IIA.17 Hermeneutics, Faith, and Relations between Cultures: Lectures in Qom, Iran. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181913 (paper). IIA.18 Change and Essence: Dialectical Relations between Change and Continuity in the Turkish Intellectual Tradition. Sinasi Gunduz and Cafer S. Yaran, eds. ISBN 1565182227 (paper). IIA. 19 Understanding Other Religions: Al-Biruni and Gadamer's \"Fusion of Horizons\". Kemal Ataman. ISBN 9781565182523 (paper). Series III. Asian Philosophical Studies III.1 Man and Nature: Chinese Philosophical Studies, I. Tang Yi-jie and Li Zhen, eds. ISBN 0819174130 (paper); 0819174122 (cloth). III.2 Chinese Foundations for Moral Education and Character Development: Chinese Philosophical Studies, II. Tran van Doan, ed. ISBN 1565180321 (paper); 156518033X (cloth). III.3 Confucianism, Buddhism, Taoism, Christianity and Chinese Culture: Chinese Philosophical Studies, III. Tang Yijie. ISBN 1565180348 (paper); 156518035-6 (cloth). III.4 Morality, Metaphysics and Chinese Culture (Metaphysics, Culture and Morality, I). Vincent Shen and Tran van Doan, eds. ISBN 1565180275 (paper); 156518026-7 (cloth). III.5 Tradition, Harmony and Transcendence. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565180313 (paper); 156518030-5 (cloth). III.6 Psychology, Phenomenology and Chinese Philosophy: Chinese Philosophical Studies, VI. Vincent Shen, Richard Knowles and Tran Van Doan, eds. ISBN 1565180453 (paper); 1565180445 (cloth). III.7 Values in Philippine Culture and Education: Philippine Philosophical Studies, I. Manuel B. Dy, Jr., ed. ISBN 1565180412 (paper); 156518040-2 (cloth). III.7A The Human Person and Society: Chinese Philosophical Studies, VIIA. Zhu Dasheng, Jin Xiping and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565180887. III.8 The Filipino Mind: Philippine Philosophical Studies II. Leonardo N. Mercado. ISBN 156518064X (paper); 156518063-1 (cloth). 404 Publications III.9 Philosophy of Science and Education: Chinese Philosophical Studies IX. Vincent Shen and Tran Van Doan, eds. ISBN 1565180763 (paper); 156518075-5 (cloth). III.10 Chinese Cultural Traditions and Modernization: Chinese Philosophical Studies, X. Wang Miaoyang, Yu Xuanmeng and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565180682 (paper). III.11 The Humanization of Technology and Chinese Culture: Chinese Philosophical Studies XI. Tomonobu Imamichi, Wang Miaoyang and Liu Fangtong, eds. ISBN 1565181166 (paper). III.12 Beyond Modernization: Chinese Roots of Global Awareness: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XII. Wang Miaoyang, Yu Xuanmeng and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565180909 (paper). III.13 Philosophy and Modernization in China: Chinese Philosophical Studies XIII. Liu Fangtong, Huang Songjie and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565180666 (paper). III.14 Economic Ethics and Chinese Culture: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XIV. Yu Xuanmeng, Lu Xiaohe, Liu Fangtong, Zhang Rulun and Georges Enderle, eds. ISBN 1565180925 (paper). III.15 Civil Society in a Chinese Context: Chinese Philosophical Studies XV. Wang Miaoyang, Yu Xuanmeng and Manuel B. Dy, eds. ISBN 1565180844 (paper). III.16 The Bases of Values in a Time of Change: Chinese and Western: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XVI. Kirti Bunchua, Liu Fangtong, Yu Xuanmeng, Yu Wujin, eds. ISBN l56518114X (paper). III.17 Dialogue between Christian Philosophy and Chinese Culture: Philosophical Perspectives for the Third Millennium: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XVII. Paschal Ting, Marian Kao and Bernard Li, eds. ISBN 1565181735 (paper). III.18 The Poverty of Ideological Education: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XVIII. Tran Van Doan. ISBN 1565181646 (paper). III.19 God and the Discovery of Man: Classical and Contemporary Approaches: Lectures in Wuhan, China. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181891 (paper). III.20 Cultural Impact on International Relations: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XX. Yu Xintian, ed. ISBN 156518176X (paper). III.21 Cultural Factors in International Relations: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XXI. Yu Xintian, ed. ISBN 1565182049 (paper). III.22 Wisdom in China and the West: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XXII. Vincent Shen and Willard Oxtoby †. ISBN 1565182057 (paper) III.23 China's Contemporary Philosophical Journey: Western Philosophy and Marxism: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XXIII. Liu Fangtong. ISBN 1565182065 (paper). III.24 Shanghai: Its Urbanization and Culture: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XXIV. Yu Xuanmeng and He Xirong, eds. ISBN 1565182073 (paper). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 405 III.25 Dialogue of Philosophies, Religions and Civilizations in the Era of Globalization: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XXV. Zhao Dunhua, ed. ISBN 9781565182431 (paper). III.26 Rethinking Marx: Chinese Philosophical Studies, XXVI. Zou Shipeng and Yang Xuegong, eds. ISBN 9781565182448 (paper). III.27 Confucian Ethics in Retrospect and Prospect: Chinese Philosophical Studies XXVII. Vincent Shen and Kwong-loi Shun, eds. ISBN 9781565182455 (paper). III.28 Cultural Tradition and Social Progress, Chinese Philosophical Studies, XXVIII. He Xirong, Yu Xuanmeng, Yu Xintian, Yu Wujing, Yang Junyi, eds. ISBN 9781565182660 (Paper). IIIB.1 Authentic Human Destiny: The Paths of Shankara and Heidegger: Indian Philosophical Studies, I. Vensus A. George. ISBN 1565181190 (paper). IIIB.2 The Experience of Being as Goal of Human Existence: The Heideggerian Approach: Indian Philosophical Studies, II. Vensus A. George. ISBN 156518145X (paper). IIIB.3 Religious Dialogue as Hermeneutics: Bede Griffiths's Advaitic Approach: Indian Philosophical Studies, III. Kuruvilla Pandikattu. ISBN 1565181395 (paper). IIIB.4 Self-Realization [Brahmaanubhava]: The Advaitic Perspective of Shankara: Indian Philosophical Studies, IV. Vensus A. George. ISBN 1565181549 (paper). IIIB.5 Gandhi: The Meaning of Mahatma for the Millennium: Indian Philosophical Studies, V. Kuruvilla Pandikattu, ed. ISBN 1565181565 (paper). IIIB.6 Civil Society in Indian Cultures: Indian Philosophical Studies, VI. Asha Mukherjee, Sabujkali Sen (Mitra) and K. Bagchi, eds. ISBN 1565181573 (paper). IIIB.7 Hermeneutics, Tradition and Contemporary Change: Lectures in Chennai/Madras, India. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181883 (paper). IIIB.8 Plenitude and Participation: The Life of God in Man: Lectures in Chennai/Madras, India. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181999 (paper). IIIB.9 Sufism and Bhakti, a Comparative Study: Indian Philosophical Studies, VII. Md. Sirajul Islam. ISBN 1565181980 (paper). IIIB.10 Reasons for Hope: Its Nature, Role and Future: Indian Philosophical Studies, VIII. Kuruvilla Pandikattu, ed. ISBN 156518 2162 (paper). IIIB.11 Lifeworlds and Ethics: Studies in Several Keys: Indian Philosophical Studies, IX. Margaret Chatterjee. ISBN 9781565182332 (paper). IIIB.12 Paths to the Divine: Ancient and Indian: Indian Philosophical Studies, X. Vensus A. George. ISBN 9781565182486. (paper). 406 Publications IIB.13 Faith, Reason, Science: Philosophical Reflections with Special Reference to Fides et Ratio: Indian Philosophical Studies, XIII. Varghese Manimala, ed. IBSN 9781565182554 (paper). IIIB.14 Identity, Creativity and Modernization: Perspectives on Indian Cultural Tradition: Indian Philosophical Studies, XIV. Sebastian Velassery and Vensus A. George, eds. ISBN 9781565182783 (paper). IIIC.1 Spiritual Values and Social Progress: Uzbekistan Philosophical Studies, I. Said Shermukhamedov and Victoriya Levinskaya, eds. ISBN 1565181433 (paper). IIIC.2 Kazakhstan: Cultural Inheritance and Social Transformation: Kazakh Philosophical Studies, I. Abdumalik Nysanbayev. ISBN 1565182022 (paper). IIIC.3 Social Memory and Contemporaneity: Kyrgyz Philosophical Studies, I. Gulnara A. Bakieva. ISBN 9781565182349 (paper). IIID.1 Reason, Rationality and Reasonableness: Vietnamese Philosophical Studies, I. Tran Van Doan. ISBN 1565181662 (paper). IIID.2 Hermeneutics for a Global Age: Lectures in Shanghai and Hanoi. George F. McLean. ISBN 1565181905 (paper). IIID.3 Cultural Traditions and Contemporary Challenges in Southeast Asia. Warayuth Sriwarakuel, Manuel B. Dy, J. Haryatmoko, Nguyen Trong Chuan, and Chhay Yiheang, eds. ISBN 1565182138 (paper). IIID.4 Filipino Cultural Traits: Claro R. Ceniza Lectures. Rolando M. Gripaldo, ed. ISBN 1565182251 (paper). IIID.5 The History of Buddhism in Vietnam. Chief editor: Nguyen Tai Thu; Authors: Dinh Minh Chi, Ly Kim Hoa, Ha thuc Minh, Ha Van Tan, Nguyen Tai Thu. ISBN 1565180984 (paper). IIID.6 Relations between Religions and Cultures in Southeast Asia. Gadis Arivia and Donny Gahral Adian, eds. ISBN 9781565182509 (paper). Series IV. Western European Philosophical Studies IV.1 Italy in Transition: The Long Road from the First to the Second Republic: The Edmund D. Pellegrino Lectures. Paolo Janni, ed. ISBN 1565181204 (paper). IV.2 Italy and the European Monetary Union: The Edmund D. Pellegrino Lectures. Paolo Janni, ed. ISBN 156518128X (paper). IV.3 Italy at the Millennium: Economy, Politics, Literature and Journalism: The Edmund D. Pellegrino Lectures. Paolo Janni, ed. ISBN 1565181581 (paper). IV.4 Speaking of God. Carlo Huber. ISBN 1565181697 (paper). IV.5 The Essence of Italian Culture and the Challenge of a Global Age. Paulo Janni and George F. McLean, eds. ISBB 1565181778 (paper). IV.6 Italic Identity in Pluralistic Contexts: Toward the Development of Intercultural Competencies. Piero Bassetti and Paolo Janni, eds. ISBN 1565181441 (paper). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 407 I.7 Phenomenon of Affectivity: Phenomenological-Anthropological Perspectives. Ghislaine Florival. ISBN 9781565182899 (paper). Series IVA. Central and Eastern European Philosophical Studies IVA.1 The Philosophy of Person: Solidarity and Cultural Creativity: Polish Philosophical Studies, I. A. Tischner, J.M. Zycinski, eds. ISBN 1565180496 (paper); 156518048-8 (cloth). IVA.2 Public and Private Social Inventions in Modern Societies: Polish Philosophical Studies, II. L. Dyczewski, P. Peachey, J.A. Kromkowski, eds. ISBN. 1565180518 (paper); 156518050X (cloth). IVA.3 Traditions and Present Problems of Czech Political Culture: Czechoslovak Philosophical Studies, I. M. Bednár and M. Vejraka, eds. ISBN 1565180577 (paper); 156518056-9 (cloth). IVA.4 Czech Philosophy in the XXth Century: Czech Philosophical Studies, II. Lubomír Nový and Jirí Gabriel, eds. ISBN 1565180291 (paper); 156518028-3 (cloth). IVA.5 Language, Values and the Slovak Nation: Slovak Philosophical Studies, I. Tibor Pichler and Jana Gašparí-ková, eds. ISBN 1565180372 (paper); 156518036-4 (cloth). IVA.6 Morality and Public Life in a Time of Change: Bulgarian Philosophical Studies, I. V. Prodanov and A. Davidov, eds. ISBN 1565180550 (paper); 1565180542 (cloth). IVA.7 Knowledge and Morality: Georgian Philosophical Studies, 1. N.V. Chavchavadze, G. Nodia and P. Peachey, eds. ISBN 1565180534 (paper); 1565180526 (cloth). IVA.8 Cultural Heritage and Social Change: Lithuanian Philosophical Studies, I. Bronius Kuzmickas and Aleksandr Dobrynin, eds. ISBN 1565180399 (paper); 1565180380 (cloth). IVA.9 National, Cultural and Ethnic Identities: Harmony beyond Conflict: Czech Philosophical Studies, IV. Jaroslav Hroch, David Hollan, George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565181131 (paper). IVA.10 Models of Identities in Postcommunist Societies: Yugoslav Philosophical Studies, I. Zagorka Golubovic and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565181211 (paper). IVA.11 Interests and Values: The Spirit of Venture in a Time of Change: Slovak Philosophical Studies, II. Tibor Pichler and Jana Gasparikova, eds. ISBN 1565181255 (paper). IVA.12 Creating Democratic Societies: Values and Norms: Bulgarian Philosophical Studies, II. Plamen Makariev, Andrew M. Blasko and Asen Davidov, eds. ISBN 156518131X (paper). IVA.13 Values of Islamic Culture and the Experience of History: Russian Philosophical Studies, I. Nur Kirabaev and Yuriy Pochta, eds. ISBN 1565181336 (paper). 408 Publications IVA.14 Values and Education in Romania Today: Romanian Philosophical Studies, I. Marin Calin and Magdalena Dumitrana, eds. ISBN 1565181344 (paper). IVA.15 Between Words and Reality, Studies on the Politics of Recognition and the Changes of Regime in Contemporary Romania: Romanian Philosophical Studies, II. Victor Neumann. ISBN 1565181611 (paper). IVA.16 Culture and Freedom: Romanian Philosophical Studies, III. Marin Aiftinca, ed. ISBN 1565181360 (paper). IVA.17 Lithuanian Philosophy: Persons and Ideas: Lithuanian Philosophical Studies, II. Jurate Baranova, ed. ISBN 1565181379 (paper). IVA.18 Human Dignity: Values and Justice: Czech Philosophical Studies, III. Miloslav Bednar, ed. ISBN 1565181409 (paper). IVA.19 Values in the Polish Cultural Tradition: Polish Philosophical Studies, III. Leon Dyczewski, ed. ISBN 1565181425 (paper). IVA.20 Liberalization and Transformation of Morality in Post-communist Countries: Polish Philosophical Studies, IV. Tadeusz Buksinski. ISBN 1565181786 (paper). IVA.21 Islamic and Christian Cultures: Conflict or Dialogue: Bulgarian Philosophical Studies, III. Plament Makariev, ed. ISBN 156518162X (paper). IVA.22 Moral, Legal and Political Values in Romanian Culture: Romanian Philosophical Studies, IV. Mihaela Czobor-Lupp and J. Stefan Lupp, eds. ISBN 1565181700 (paper). IVA.23 Social Philosophy: Paradigm of Contemporary Thinking: Lithuanian Philosophical Studies, III. Jurate Morkuniene. ISBN 1565182030 (paper). IVA.24 Romania: Cultural Identity and Education for Civil Society: Romanian Philosophical Studies, V. Magdalena Dumitrana, ed. ISBN 156518209X (paper). IVA.25 Polish Axiology: the 20th Century and Beyond: Polish Philosophical Studies, V. Stanislaw Jedynak, ed. ISBN 1565181417 (paper). IVA.26 Contemporary Philosophical Discourse in Lithuania: Lithuanian Philosophical Studies, IV. Jurate Baranova, ed. ISBN 156518-2154 (paper). IVA.27 Eastern Europe and the Challenges of Globalization: Polish Philosophical Studies, VI. Tadeusz Buksinski and Dariusz Dobrzanski, ed. ISBN 1565182189 (paper). IVA.28 Church, State, and Society in Eastern Europe: Hungarian Philosophical Studies, I. Miklós Tomka. ISBN 156518226X (paper). IVA.29 Politics, Ethics, and the Challenges to Democracy in 'New Independent States': Georgian Philosophical Studies, II. Tinatin Bochorishvili, William Sweet, Daniel Ahern, eds. ISBN 9781565182240 (paper). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 409 IVA.30 Comparative Ethics in a Global Age: Russian Philosophical Studies II. Marietta T. Stepanyants, eds. ISBN 9781565182356 (paper). IVA.31 Identity and Values of Lithuanians: Lithuanian Philosophical Studies, V. Aida Savicka, eds. ISBN 9781565182367 (paper). IVA.32 The Challenge of Our Hope: Christian Faith in Dialogue: Polish Philosophical Studies, VII. Waclaw Hryniewicz. ISBN 9781565182370 (paper). IVA.33 Diversity and Dialogue: Culture and Values in the Age of Globalization. Andrew Blasko and Plamen Makariev, eds. ISBN 9781565182387 (paper). IVA. 34 Civil Society, Pluralism and Universalism: Polish Philosophical Studies, VIII. Eugeniusz Gorski. ISBN 9781565182417 (paper). IVA.35 Romanian Philosophical Culture, Globalization, and Education: Romanian Philosophical Studies VI. Stefan Popenici and Alin Tat and, eds. ISBN 9781565182424 (paper). IVA.36 Political Transformation and Changing Identities in Central and Eastern Europe: Lithuanian Philosophical Studies, VI. Andrew Blasko and Diana Janušauskienė, eds. ISBN 9781565182462 (paper). IVA.37 Truth and Morality: The Role of Truth in Public Life: Romanian Philosophical Studies, VII. Wilhelm Dancă, ed. ISBN 9781565182493 (paper). IVA.38 Globalization and Culture: Outlines of Contemporary Social Cognition: Lithuanian Philosophical Studies, VII. Jurate Morkuniene, ed. ISBN 9781565182516 (paper). IVA.39 Knowledge and Belief in the Dialogue of Cultures, Russian Philosophical Studies, III. Marietta Stepanyants, ed. ISBN 9781565182622 (paper). IVA.40 God and the Post-Modern Thought: Philosophical Issues in the Contemporary Critique of Modernity, Polish Philosophical Studies, IX. Józef Życiński. ISBN 9781565182677 (paper). IVA.41 Dialogue among Civilizations, Russian Philosophical Studies, IV. Nur Kirabaev and Yuriy Pochta, eds. ISBN 9781565182653 (paper). IVA.42 The Idea of Solidarity: Philosophical and Social Contexts, Polish Philosophical Studies, X. Dariusz Dobrzanski, ed. ISBN 9781565182961 (paper). IVA.43 God's Spirit in the World: Ecumenical and Cultural Essays, Polish Philosophical Studies, XI. Waclaw Hryniewicz. ISBN 9781565182738 (paper). IVA.44 Philosophical Theology and the Christian Traditions: Russian and Western Perspectives, Russian Philosophical Studies, V. David Bradshaw, ed. ISBN 9781565182752 (paper). IVA.45 Ethics and the Challenge of Secularism: Russian Philosophical Studies, VI. David Bradshaw, ed. ISBN 9781565182806 (paper). 410 Publications IVA.46 Philosophy and Spirituality across Cultures and Civilizations: Russian Philosophical Studies, VII. Nur Kirabaev, Yuriy Pochta and Ruzana Pskhu, eds. ISBN 9781565182820 (paper). IVA.47 Values of the Human Person Contemporary Challenges: Romanian Philosophical Studies, VIII. Mihaela Pop, ed. ISBN 9781565182844 (paper). Series V. Latin American Philosophical Studies V.1 The Social Context and Values: Perspectives of the Americas. O. Pegoraro, ed. ISBN 081917355X (paper); 0819173541 (cloth). V.2 Culture, Human Rights and Peace in Central America. Raul Molina and Timothy Ready, eds. ISBN 0819173576 (paper); 0819173568 (cloth). V.3 El Cristianismo Aymara: Inculturacion o Culturizacion? Luis Jolicoeur. ISBN 1565181042 (paper). V.4 Love as the Foundation of Moral Education and Character Development. Luis Ugalde, Nicolas Barros and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565180801 (paper). V.5 Human Rights, Solidarity and Subsidiarity: Essays towards a Social Ontology. Carlos E.A. Maldonado. ISBN 1565181107 (paper). V.6 A New World: A Perspective from Ibero America. H. Daniel Dei, ed. ISBN 9781565182639 (paper). Series VI. Foundations of Moral Education VI.1 Philosophical Foundations for Moral Education and Character Development: Act and Agent. G. McLean and F. Ellrod, eds. ISBN 156518001-1 (paper); ISBN 1565180003 (cloth). VI.2 Psychological Foundations for Moral Education and Character Development: An Integrated Theory of Moral Development. R. Knowles, ed. ISBN 156518002X (paper); 156518003-8 (cloth). VI.3 Character Development in Schools and Beyond. Kevin Ryan and Thomas Lickona, eds. ISBN 1565180593 (paper); 156518058-5 (cloth). VI.4 The Social Context and Values: Perspectives of the Americas. O. Pegoraro, ed. ISBN 081917355X (paper); 0819173541 (cloth). VI.5 Chinese Foundations for Moral Education and Character Development. Tran van Doan, ed. ISBN 1565180321 (paper); 156518033 (cloth). VI.6 Love as the Foundation of Moral Education and Character Development. Luis Ugalde, Nicolas Barros and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565180801 (paper). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 411 Series VII. Seminars on Culture and Values VII.1 The Social Context and Values: Perspectives of the Americas. O. Pegoraro, ed. ISBN 081917355X (paper); 0819173541 (cloth). VII.2 Culture, Human Rights and Peace in Central America. Raul Molina and Timothy Ready, eds. ISBN 0819173576 (paper); 0819173568 (cloth). VII.3 Relations between Cultures. John A. Kromkowski, ed. ISBN 1565180089 (paper); 1565180097 (cloth). VII.4 Moral Imagination and Character Development: Volume I, The Imagination. George F. McLean and John A. Kromkowski, eds. ISBN 1565181743 (paper). VII.5 Moral Imagination and Character Development: Volume II, Moral Imagination in Personal Formation and Character Development. George F. McLean and Richard Knowles, eds. ISBN 1565181816 (paper). VII.6 Moral Imagination and Character Development: Volume III, Imagination in Religion and Social Life. George F. McLean and John K. White, eds. ISBN 1565181824 (paper). VII.7 Hermeneutics and Inculturation. George F. McLean, Antonio Gallo, Robert Magliola, eds. ISBN 1565181840 (paper). VII.8 Culture, Evangelization, and Dialogue. Antonio Gallo and Robert Magliola, eds. ISBN 1565181832 (paper). VII.9 The Place of the Person in Social Life. Paul Peachey and John A. Kromkowski, eds. ISBN 1565180127 (paper); 156518013-5 (cloth). VII.10 Urbanization and Values. John A. Kromkowski, ed. ISBN 1565180100 (paper); 1565180119 (cloth). VII.11 Freedom and Choice in a Democracy, Volume I: Meanings of Freedom. Robert Magliola and John Farrelly, eds. ISBN 1565181867 (paper). VII.12 Freedom and Choice in a Democracy, Volume II: The Difficult Passage to Freedom. Robert Magliola and Richard Khuri, eds. ISBN 1565181859 (paper). VII 13 Cultural Identity, Pluralism and Globalization (2 volumes). John P. Hogan, ed. ISBN 1565182170 (paper). VII.14 Democracy: In the Throes of Liberalism and Totalitarianism. George F. McLean, Robert Magliola, William Fox, eds. ISBN 1565181956 (paper). VII.15 Democracy and Values in Global Times: With Nigeria as a Case Study. George F. McLean, Robert Magliola, Joseph Abah, eds. ISBN 1565181956 (paper). VII.16 Civil Society and Social Reconstruction. George F. McLean, ed. ISBN 1565180860 (paper). VII.17 Civil Society: Who Belongs? William A.Barbieri, Robert Magliola, Rosemary Winslow, eds. ISBN 1565181972 (paper). 412 Publications VII.18 The Humanization of Social Life: Theory and Challenges. Christopher Wheatley, Robert P. Badillo, Rose B. Calabretta, Robert Magliola, eds. ISBN 1565182006 (paper). VII.19 The Humanization of Social Life: Cultural Resources and Historical Responses. Ronald S. Calinger, Robert P. Badillo, Rose B. Calabretta, Robert Magliola, eds. ISBN 1565182006 (paper). VII.20 Religious Inspiration for Public Life: Religion in Public Life, Volume I. George F. McLean, John A. Kromkowski and Robert Magliola, eds. ISBN 1565182103 (paper). VII.21 Religion and Political Structures from Fundamentalism to Public Service: Religion in Public Life, Volume II. John T. Ford, Robert A. Destro and Charles R. Dechert, eds. ISBN 1565182111 (paper). VII.22 Civil Society as Democratic Practice. Antonio F. Perez, Semou Pathé Gueye, Yang Fenggang, eds. ISBN 1565182146 (paper). VII.23 Ecumenism and Nostra Aetate in the 21st Century. George F. McLean and John P. Hogan, eds. ISBN 1565182197 (paper). VII.24 Multiple Paths to God: Nostra Aetate: 40 years Later. John P. Hogan, George F. McLean & John A. Kromkowski, eds. ISBN 1565182200 (paper). VII.25 Globalization and Identity. Andrew Blasko, Taras Dobko, Pham Van Duc and George Pattery, eds. ISBN 1565182200 (paper). VII.26 Communication across Cultures: The Hermeneutics of Cultures and Religions in a Global Age. Chibueze C. Udeani, Veerachart Nimanong, Zou Shipeng, Mustafa Malik, eds. ISBN: 9781565182400 (paper). VII.27 Symbols, Cultures and Identities in a Time of Global Interaction. Paata Chkheidze, Hoang Thi Tho and Yaroslav Pasko, eds. ISBN 9781565182608 (paper). VII. 28 Restorying the 'Polis':Civil Society as Narrative Reconstruction. Yuriy Pochta, Rosemary Winslow, eds. ISNB 978156518 (paper). VII.29 History and Cultural Identity: Retrieving the Past, Shaping the Future. John P. Hogan, ed. ISBN 9781565182684 (paper). VII.30 Human Nature: Stable and/or Changing? John P. Hogan, ed. ISBN 9781565182431 (paper). VII.31 Reasoning in Faith: Cultural Foundations for Civil Society and Globalization. Octave Kamwiziku Wozol, Sebastian Velassery and Jurate Baranova, eds. ISBN 9781565182868 (paper). VII.32 Building Community in a Mobile/Global Age:Migration and Hospitality. John P. Hogan, Vensus A. George and Corazon T. Toralba, eds. ISBN 9781565182875 (paper). Series VIII. Christian Philosophical Studies VIII.1 Church and People: Disjunctions in a Secular Age, Christian Philosophical Studies, I. Charles Taylor, José Casanova and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN9781565182745 (paper). Council for Research in Values and Philosophy 413 VIII.2 God's Spirit in the World: Ecumenical and Cultural Essays, Christian Philosophical Studies, II. Waclaw Hryniewicz. ISBN 9781565182738 (paper). VIII.3 Philosophical Theology and the Christian Traditions: Russian and Western Perspectives, Christian Philosophical Studies, III. David Bradshaw, ed. ISBN 9781565182752 (paper). VIII.4 Ethics and the Challenge of Secularism: Christian Philosophical Studies, IV. David Bradshaw, ed. ISBN 9781565182806 (paper). VIII.5 Freedom for Faith: Theological Hermeneutics of Discovery based on George F. McLean's Philosophy of Culture: Christian Philosophical Studies, V. John M. Staak. ISBN 9781565182837 (paper). VIII.6 Humanity on the Threshold: Religious Perspective on Transhumanism: Christian Philosophical Studies, VI. John C. Haughey and Ilia Delio, eds. ISBN 9781565182882 (paper). The International Society for Metaphysics ISM.1 Person and Nature. George F. McLean and Hugo Meynell, eds. ISBN 0819170267 (paper); 0819170259 (cloth). ISM.2 Person and Society. George F. McLean and Hugo Meynell, eds. ISBN 0819169250 (paper); 0819169242 (cloth). ISM.3 Person and God. George F. McLean and Hugo Meynell, eds. ISBN 0819169382 (paper); 0819169374 (cloth). ISM.4 The Nature of Metaphysical Knowledge. George F. McLean and Hugo Meynell, eds. ISBN 0819169277 (paper); 0819169269 (cloth). ISM.5 Philosophhical Challenges and Opportunities of Globalization. Oliva Blanchette, Tomonobu Imamichi and George F. McLean, eds. ISBN 1565181298 (paper). ISM.6 The Dialogue of Cultural Traditions: Global Perspective. William Sweet, George F. McLean, Tomonobu Imamichi, Safak Ural, O. Faruk Akyol, eds. ISBN 9781565182585 (paper). ISM. 7 Philosophy Emerging from Culture. William Sweet, George F. McLean, Oliva Blanchette, Wonbin Park, eds. ISBN 9781565182851 (paper). The series is published by: The Council for Research in Values and Philosophy, Gibbons Hall B-20, 620 Michigan Avenue, NE, Washington, D.C. 20064; Telephone and Fax: 202/319-6089; e-mail: cua-rvp@cua.edu; website: http://www.crvp.org. All titles are available in paper except as noted. The series is distributed by: The Council for Research on Values and Philosophy – OST, 285 Oblate Drive, San Antonio, T.X., 78216; Telephone: (210)341-1366 x205; Email: mmartin@ost.edu."}
{"meta": {"title": "We're All Folk: An Interview with Neil Levy about Experimental Philosophy and Conceptual Analysis", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/article", "creator": "Kitano, Yasuko", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "The following is a transcript of the interview I (Yasuko Kitano) conducted with Neil Levy (The Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics, CAPPE)  on the 23rd in July 2009, while he was in Tokyo to give a series of lectures on neuroethics at The University of Tokyo Center for Philosophy. I edited his words for publication with his approval.", "date": "2011", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/LEVWAF", "language": "en", "datestamp": "2020-04-05T22:10:49Z"}, "text": "Annals of the Japan Association for Philosophy of Science Vol.19 (2011) 87~98 87 We're All Folk: An Interview with Neil Levy about Experimental Philosophy and Conceptual Analysis Neil Levy and Yasuko Kitano∗,† The following is a transcript of the interview I (Yasuko Kitano) conducted with Neil Levy (The Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics, CAPPE)1 on the 23rd in July 2009, while he was in Tokyo to give a series of lectures on neuroethics at the University of Tokyo Center for Philosophy. The aim of this article is not to reconstruct the interview precisely. Following the referees' inscriptions, I edited his words for publication with his approval2. Yasuko Kitano (Y.K.) – I'd like to talk with you about experimental philosophy today. Recently, experimental philosophy, which is often called \"x-phi\" by younger practitioners, seems to be becoming better known in the Anglophone world. Kwame Anthony Appiah's article came out in The NY Times in December 2007, and David Edmonds and Nigel Warburton's appeared in Prospect in March 2009. And this June, a programme on this movement was broadcasted on BBC Radio 4. According to Edmonds and Warburton (2009), there are three types of experimental philosophy. The first uses new brain-scanning technology and looks for patterns of neural activity when subjects are presented with philosophical problems. In the second type, philosophers conduct questionnaires to discover folk intuitions, e.g. Joshua Knobe's works. In the third, they carry out fieldwork; they observe how people behave in particular situations. For example, experiments as to how people behave after finding a dime in the return slot in a telephone booth. Some philosophers exhibit doubt about the significance of the second type of experimental philosophy. Timothy Williamson, in an article contributed to Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, says \"If anything can be pursued in an armchair, ∗ The Institute for Sustainability Research and Education, Hosei Universiy † To contact the interviewer, please write to: yskitano@gmail.com 1 He is no longer at CAPPE, but at the Florey Neuroscience Institutes. His broad research interests cover at least the following fields: free will and moral responsibility, philosophical psychology, moral cognition, practical epistemology, and neuroethics. He is editor-in-chief of the journal Neuroethics. For his major publications, see Levy (2002a; 2002b; 2002c; 2004; 2007; forthcoming 2011). For more detail, see: http://neuro-ethics.org/. 2 I am grateful to the anonymous referees, Florian Cova (Jean Nicod Institute) and John O'Dea (University of Tokyo) for their helpful comments on an earlier draft. - 87 - 88 Neil Levy and Yasuko Kitano Vol. 19 philosophy can\" and afterwards in his book, The Philosophy of Philosophy, says \"In particular, on the account in this book, the method of conducting opinion polls among non-philosophers is not very much more likely to be the best way of answering philosophical questions than the method of conducting opinion polls among non-physicists is to be the best way of answering physical questions.\" (Williamson 2007:7) (Q1) Where do you think experimental philosophy's significance is to be found, if anywhere? Neil Levy (N.L.) – I think there is some. Well, the kind of experimental philosophy that I'm most interested in isn't actually on that list. It's a kind that rather simply tries to manipulate and observe behaviour. So for instance, the experiment that I described yesterday which I'm going to run is a cognitive load manipulation3. The idea is, rather than just to ask people what their views are, which give you their reflected views, to do things to bring out what their unreflective views are, which can be interesting because their unreflective views can be shown to influence behaviour. So particularly for ethics, I think this kind of experimental philosophy is very interesting, but I don't think that very much of it is being done. Well, I can give you one example of experimental philosophy that has been done in that mould. We don't think of it as being experimental philosophy as it was not done by philosophers. But it's about free will. So why not call it experimental philosophy. It's the paper by Baumeister and Masicampo4. They gave their subjects a passage from Francis Crick to read. In the passage Crick is mocking of the idea of free will; he says \"there's no such thing as free will, and only a fool would believe that.\" And then they gave their subjects and matched controls that hadn't read that 3 In the handout of the lecture under the title of \"Resisting Weakness of the Will,\" Levy points out that there are two basic systems of cognitive processes: system1 and system 2. System 1 consists of mechanisms that are fast, operate in parallel, and are undemanding of cognitive resources. System 2, on the other hand, consists of mechanisms that are slow, operate serially, and are demanding of cognitive resources. When the agent is under cognitive load (e.g. multitasking), system 1 processes pick up the burden and take over from system 2. The agent acts less intelligently (in more stereotypical ways) when her or his responses are generated by system 1. On the basis of this account of cognitive processes and other empirical evidence from cognitive and social psychology, he argues that weakness of the will is simply a special case of the depletion of system 2 resources, throwing the agent back on to system 1. What he is suggesting in the end is this: the behaviour we call weakness of the will exists but we ought to jettison the (folk psychological) concept \"weakness of the will\" in favour of a focus on the interrelationships between system 1 and system 2 because neither the explanatory purposes of psychology nor our practical purposes of increasing our ability to maintain self-control are well-served by retaining the concept. 4 Levy confirmed that he had referred to Vohs and Shooler (2008) and Baumeister et al. (2009). For the relating discussions, see Nahmias (2009). - 88 - We're All Folk: An Interview with Neil Levy about Experimental Philosophy and Conceptual Analysis 89 passage a test to do on computer where they were trying to get the right answers. People were able to cheat on their test. They were told that there was a problem with the computer and that sometimes the right answers would appear on the screen and they'd get some warning before that happened, so that they could press the space bar when there was a warning, so they didn't get the right answer and so they could test fairly. And they found that the people who had read the passage by Francis Crick cheated much more. They allowed the answer to come up and then pretended that they had come up with it themselves. So they concluded that belief in free will is conducive to good behaviour. Now, I think that there are all sorts of problems with that experiment. But still it's clearly in the ballpark of experimental philosophy. It's not asking people about their views about free will. They weren't asked any questions while their behaviour was observed and manipulated. I think that's often more interesting. But to come back to the survey style, I think there are some problems. I've got some sympathy for Williamson's view. I expect people to be confused about various things if they haven't thought about them and it's not particularly interesting to me to learn that most people are Libertarians, or most people are Compatibilists. When people are asked to justify this they justify it in terms of the burden of proof. And I'm very unconvinced that burden-of-proof arguments actually carry any weight whatsoever. I don't want to know who has the burden of proof. I want to know who has the better arguments. I don't believe we're in a situation where burdens-ofproof can be decisive. One side says we need to conclude that Libertarianism is true because Compatibilists haven't carried the burden of proof or the other way. That makes sense in a court of law but I'm not sure that the idea of a burden of proof makes much sense in philosophy. So, I have my doubts about the relevance in the free will case of this just asking people for their views. Eddy Nahmias's paper, the error theory one5, is interesting for the same reason why, say, Josh Knobe's research is interesting. Knobe finds that intuitions about causation in ordinary people are affected by the moral status of the action in question. I think that's interesting because the same process might be affecting philosophies' judgements about causation too. And in fact, I haven't read it yet, but somebody told me that Josh has written a paper with Christopher Hitchcock, a big name in causation, just coming out in The Journal of Philosophy. They argue just that philosophers are themselves affected by the Knobe effect6 in their discussion of cases. So there's something really interesting, in the same way as when a psychologist discovers reasoning bias, not because it tells us about the folk but because it tells us about everybody, because we're all folk. And Nahmias's paper is interesting and provocative because what he's offering is 5 Nahmias and Murray (forthcoming). 6 See a series of his earlier papers: Knobe (2003a; 2003b; 2004; 2006a; 2006b). - 89 - 90 Neil Levy and Yasuko Kitano Vol. 19 an explanation of why philosophers are tempted to buy libertarianism. He suggests that maybe their initial worry isn't about determinism at all but about bypassing of psychological states, and then maybe they've argued themselves into thinking they're libertarians on irrelevant grounds. Now I don't know if that's true but it's certainly an interesting claim. Y.K. – So, let's move on to the next question. Looking back at the history of AngloAmerican philosophy in the past 100 years, conceptual analysis has been its dominant strain. \"Philosophy of this kind considers,\" Edmonds and Warburton say, \"not so much how things are, but rather how we think about them: the way we carve up the world, the frontiers of meaning, of what makes sense.\" Experimental philosophy is often thought as a movement challenging such armchair philosophy. But I think there is need to be cautious here. Knobe and Nichols say, in the introduction to the anthology Experimental Philosophy they edited, \"As far as we know, no experimental philosopher has conducted an analysis of one concept in terms of another,\" But some philosophers, e.g. Mark Balaguer7 and Anntti Kauppinen8, think that experimental philosophy is doing conceptual analysis on the basis of experiments. (Q2) If that is true then can we not expect much impact from the second type of experimental philosophy? N.L. – I don't think that experiments on the Knobe effect are doing conceptual analysis as well. They're not asking you about what our concept of causation is. They're trying to work out the psychological processes involved in judgements of causation. You can't blackbox the concept while you're doing that, nor do I think that the experimental philosophy on free will is conceptual analysis. I think it presupposes conceptual analysis, because you need some kind of analysis of the concept in order to be able to formulate your questions, but that's true in psychology too. I used to be more impressed by the difference between philosophy and the sciences until I started reading the sciences very seriously and discovered that they're in much the same boat as we are. If you read the papers in cognitive science, there's a lot of conceptual analysis going on. There's a lot of theory building going on. And a great deal of it doesn't look very different to what philosophers do. Philosophers have been doing what Jesse Prinz calls \"empirical philosophy\"9 for a long time. That's been the standard way of approaching philosophy of mind, for instance, or philosophy of biology. Conceptual analysis is constrained by seriously delving into the empirical data. That's exactly what psychologists and cognitive scientists do. They just do 7 Balaguer (2009). 8 Kauppinen (2007). 9 Prinz (2008). - 90 - We're All Folk: An Interview with Neil Levy about Experimental Philosophy and Conceptual Analysis 91 more of gathering of data themselves, but you know, some of them don't do much gathering of data at all. Some of them are in the armchair just as much as we are. All Souls at Oxford have just appointed a psychologist to a position that involves no lab research at all. It's the first one to my knowledge, but it's a possibility in psychology. But you know, she's a psychologist. She's doing empirical psychology just in the way that people do empirical philosophy. And, to get ad hominem, I don't think Balaguer is entitled to his claim, because what he wants to do, to look at human decision-making, requires just the kind of work to dissociate the processes that are part of judgement that the experimental philosophers are aiming to do. So I don't see how we would possibly begin to see what the nature of human decision-making is, except by looking at the ways in which various decision-making processes dissociate under experimental conditions. That's what people like Wegner, Libet, Gazzaniga and so forth do. So I don't see how it's somehow unscientific for philosophers to do it. Y.K. – Now let's move on to Balaguer's paper10. Let me first refresh your memory of his argument. His point is that \"the semantic component of the problem of free will\" is, in a \"nontrivial way\" irrelevant to \"the metaphysical component of the problem of free will\", that is, irrelevant to all substantive questions about human decision-making processes. He first argues that (i) the compatibilism question reduces to the \"whatis-free-will\" question, and then that (ii) the \"do-we-have-free-will\" question collapses into the \"what-is-free-will\" question and the \"which-kinds-of-freedom-do-we-have\" question (libertarian freedom, Humean freedom, Frankfurtian freedom, and so on). The assumption here is that the \"what-is-free-will\" question can be thought of as a question to which the answer is correct if it captures the ordinary-language (OL) meaning (or meanings) of the expression 'free will' (this is the OL View). He then argues that (iii) the \"what-is-free-will\" question is irrelevant to the \"do-we-have-freewill\" question irrespective of whether or not the OL view is correct. (Q3) You introduced his paper in the blog the Garden of Forking Paths. Why did his argument draw your attention? N.L. – So I'll answer that question and then talk about the claims it created. Why did I choose that paper? Well, he's a really interesting philosopher, in many ways. One of the reasons he's really interesting is most libertarians are religiously motivated – most of them are, I think, American Christians and most of them are motivated by a belief that free will is necessary to justify heaven and hell, and libertarian free will. And many of them are also, as Christians, believers that free will requires to 10 See note 7. - 91 - 92 Neil Levy and Yasuko Kitano Vol. 19 be, and is, in fact, actual because of non-physical properties. So many of them are agent-causationists. If you ever have the misfortune to go to a society of Christian philosophers meeting, you'll discover all these philosophers who are working on free will are agent-causationists and by the agent causal power they mean the soul or something like that. And some of them are good philosophers. Tim O'Connor has a view like that and he has some strange views but is a very good philosopher. There's no doubt about it. But to meet someone like Balaguer, who is a libertarian yet, as far as I know, completely unmotivated by religious concerns and tightly motivated by his reading of the sciences, is very unusual. So the fact is that he's a good philosopher but also that he's got such an unusual position. He's a libertarian of a kind, but he's highly motivated by his reading of neuroscience. I saw him having a debate with Adina Roskies. She's a neuroscientist originally. She has a PhD in neuroscience, and edited the journal 'Neuron' for a few years and then she went back and did a Philosophy PhD at MIT. She's recently published a paper with Nichols in The Journal of Philosophy called \"Bringing moral responsibility down to earth\" giving a 2-D semantics account of folk intuitions about free will11. She's a very good philosopher as well as a very good neuroscientist. I saw her debate, a few years ago, with Balaguer arguing that neuroscience is consistent with indeterminism of brain processes. But that's part of the reason. He's so unusual. And the paper is a very provocative one in many ways. It's a challenge to the entire free will debate, and very relevant. So that's why I chose the paper. Now, when you go back to his claims, there were two things I wanted to say. (Checks the interviewer's original question to refresh memory). Oh, yes, the first thing I wanted to say was about ordinary language. You can see why Balaguer thinks that experimental philosophy is continuous, because he takes conceptual analysis to be about capturing the ordinary language use of the term pretty well and experimental philosophers seem to be about capturing what the ordinary language use of the term 'free will' is. But I don't think that's quite right though. In fact I think that all the questions are about moral responsibility in the experimental literature and the reason is that I don't think that free will has a well-defined meaning in the folk vocabulary. Peter van Inwagen did some work few years ago–pretty sure it was van Inwagen–in which he looked at some big databases of classics of English Literature, Chaucer all the way through to 20th Century. And he looked for the occurrence of 'free will' and it was just about two in the entire corpus of English Literature. It just isn't a phrase in ordinary language. I suspect people will recognise it but not really attach a meaning to it other than as some kind of philosophical term. That's one thing. The other thing is, if you're trying to capture what you mean by 'free will', you don't want your use of 'free will' to diverge from folk concepts. I think that the way to go about that isn't to try and capture what 11 Roskies and Nichols (2008). - 92 - We're All Folk: An Interview with Neil Levy about Experimental Philosophy and Conceptual Analysis 93 the folk mean by 'free will', but instead to ask what concept makes sense of our free will practices. Now, what our free will practices are is controversial, because most philosophers would say they're about our responsibility practices, but some don't agree. Some think that free will is not about responsibility or not essentially about responsibility and van Inwagen's one of them. So, that makes it difficult but certainly you can tie your concepts to everyday meaning without trying to tie them to what the folk mean – I don't want to call it conceptual analysis though. So that's one of the things that I wanted to say. The other thing is, and maybe this is as much relevant to your fourth question as your third. Can we in fact do the kind of work that Balaguer wants us to do? Can we really separate this semantic question from the metaphysical question the way he suggests? I don't think we can. I don't know what it would mean to study human decision making, to try and get at the facts about human decision making, except to know in a very theoretically saturated way. When we wanted to know what the processes are, we have to understand them in terms of our concepts and there's a relationship here between our concepts and the facts as we try to describe them because we may find that they don't fit into our pre-existing concepts very well. But we can only do it in a theoretically saturated way, and this is kind of a cliché in philosophy and science, but it's still true that our perception is theory-laden; so we can't do the description except in terms of our concepts. And so what's metaphysically interesting here is, I take it, at least in part, is whether human decision making is such that we actually exercise control over our choices, we're actually the authors of our choices, we're the originators of our choices. To answer those questions, we can't just look at what's going on in the brain. We have to ask questions about those processes and whether they satisfy conceptual conditions that we lay down on those notions. The best example here is the luck objection. Balaguer is a libertarian, and he thinks he can avoid the luck objection. Alfred Mele has recently written a book about this12. The basic idea is working with Robert Kane's event causal libertarianism. On Kane's view we sometimes face situations in which it's metaphysically undetermined whether we'll do the right thing or the wrong thing, and it's open to us to choose either way, and it's undetermined which way we'll choose. Mele says, what decides whether we'll choose one way or the other? Well, it can't be, by hypothesis, anything about our state of character, or our beliefs or our desires, or even how hard we're trying if it's all willings or volitions. It can't be any of that, because by hypothesis, holding all that constant, both of the options are metaphysically available to us. So, Mele says it can't be anything but luck which decides whether we choose one way or the other. The agent doesn't settle it, luck does. And he says you can't be responsible for choosing A rather than B, if 12 Mele (2006). - 93 - 94 Neil Levy and Yasuko Kitano Vol. 19 it's just a matter of luck that you chose A. Now there's a big debate here, Kane has various responses, and other people have other responses, and so forth. But Kane has given us a description of the brain. It's very speculative but let's assume that it's true. Now we know all the facts of the brain. We know, Kane says, that under certain conditions, when agents are torn between two options, there are competing neural networks which simultaneously attempt to initiate conflicting actions. This disrupts the thermodynamic equilibrium in the brain. I think it's laughable science, but anyway, let's assume it's true. This magnifies quantum mechanical level events to the level where they actually have an effect at the macroscopic scale of the brain and it becomes metaphysically open to us, which is, one way or the other, with the indeterministic event causal process settling which way we choose. That's a complete description of the brain, or at least it's complete enough. So now we know all the facts. We've got what Balaguer says is metaphysics, but we still don't know if we're free, because we still haven't got an answer to the luck objection, because you can't look in the brain and find an answer to the luck objection. Both of them are assuming an identical description of the facts, but they're still diverging on whether the agent is free. And I think the same is true for Balaguer's view. We can know all the facts, and still there's an argument to be had about whether the agent is free, and that argument can only be settled by – I don't want to say conceptual analysis – conceptual work. So I just don't think that we can do what he claims we can do with our theory, i.e. effective conceptual work, but even if we could, it would still lead us with a lot of further conceptual work to do. I think I might have moved on to question four. Y.K. – In Balaguer's view, experimental philosophy addresses the \"semantic component of the problem of free will\" just as traditional conceptual analysis does; that is, it is irrelevant to discovering the nature of the world. But in my finding, surely we could use the results of subject polls to define the word free will, but what experimental philosophers are doing, at least in Knobe and his friends' brand of it, is figuring out folk intuitions and detecting the underlying psychological processes that generate them. You can say that this is about how things are, which is not a semantic question. So you could say this is about \"how things are\" and it might be needed to create a third category – not only \"what is free will\" question and \"do we have free will\" question, but the third category \"what do we think of free will\" question. By the term \"think\" I mean having certain psychological states. N.L. – I think that's right, but I think there are no unique divisions. I do think that in so far as we conceptualise the world and we are conceptualising beings. We never stop doing semantics. - 94 - We're All Folk: An Interview with Neil Levy about Experimental Philosophy and Conceptual Analysis 95 Y.K. – Analysing concepts is a bit different from analysing folk intuitions, isn't it? N.L. – It is. But I think analysing folk intuitions is most interesting when it bears back on our own concepts. We start to wonder about if our own intuitions are being affected by the same processes we find in the folk. So, here's an instance. Whether it bears up I don't know, but Tamara Horowitz had a paper13 arguing that intuitions about double effects in ethics. The idea is that there are certain states of affairs it's wrong to intend to bring about, but you can bring them about as a foreseen consequence of an action, so long as you don't intend to bring them about. A classic example: it's wrong for a doctor to intend the patient's death, but a doctor can give the patient a lethal dose of morphine intending only to relieve pain, even though the doctor foresees that the patient will die. Horowitz argued that prospect theory, which is one of Kahneman and Tversky's many theories, explains our intuitions of double effect. According to prospect theory, in terms of how we value, we think that losses are worse than foregone gains. Since prospect theory is clearly irrational, you can frame the same problem in such a way as to generate conflicting options. They would show that double effect is irrational, at least. That was the argument. Frances Kamm replied14 and argued that they're not the same thing, but at least that's an instance where looking at the way in which folk conceptualise is of direct philosophical interest, because it might show that the way that philosophers have thought about a problem is itself the product of a psychological process that they can't acknowledge, that they would see as irrational. Y.K. – So when we're conducting conceptual analysis, irrationality never comes up, is that what you mean? N.L. – Well, typically we bracket all those kinds of questions, when we're doing conceptual analysis, we're trying to think about how we think about a certain part of logical space. One of the things we do is to look for conflicts in the ways we think about them and try to resolve those conflicts. So, I suppose what I'm calling for, the way we try to do conceptual analysis, is in part via reflective equilibrium. So we're engaged in a normal reflective equilibrium process of attempting to harmonise the various intuitions and dispositions that we have with regard to a particular part of logical space. What this gives us is the material for wide reflective equilibrium. Wide reflective equilibrium asks us to constrain our reflective equilibrium in terms of the findings of science, or relevant theories. I'm suggesting that what this gives us are some relevant theories in terms of which to constrain that conceptual analysis. 13 Horowitz (1998). 14 Kamm (1998). - 95 - 96 Neil Levy and Yasuko Kitano Vol. 19 What weight to give to those findings is an open question. But, in so far as we can take those results seriously, then they should be a genuine constraint on the conceptual analysis. That is, they have to be a fixed point. I think this is the real goal of experimental philosophy, which is to find evidence for a particular intuition to be unreliable. Because it gives us a fixed point in our wide reflective equilibrium. Y.K. – So, what would you say about Stich's criticism about intuitions? What is your attitude to that? N.L. – I don't know of how to do philosophy without intuitions. Nor do I think that anyone know how to do any intellectual enquiry without intuitions. So in a broader sense, all of conceptual work that includes work in physics and history and cognitive science and everywhere else, is reliant on intuitions, because intuitions about simplicity, about coherence between parts of a theory all play an indispensable role. This is a cliché again, but given a set of experimental evidence, there's an indefinitely large set of theories which are open to us. We simply ignore most of that logical space, and then we have an argument about, in that small part of that logical space, which of the theories is better supported by the evidence, and what experiments would be crucial to settle between live options. And all of that we conduct – by \"we\" I mean all of us, scientists as well as philosophers – we conduct by reference to our intuitions about what supports what. So I don't see us getting out of intuitions. Now I do believe that the more data the better, simply because the more data you have available the finer grained your distinctions can be, and this is the way of progress. The more items of data, the more precise the area of logical space you can delineate. But I don't believe that we can ever dispense with intuitions. Y.K. – Is what you're saying compatible with the idea that our intuitions are open to criticism, open to empirical studies? N.L. – Yes. Including something that psychologists often do, that is to compare responses of ordinary subjects in experimental situations which differ in something seemingly trivial. The dime study, for instance15. Something really trivial like finding a dime will affect people's behaviour. I think that philosophers are doing an analogous thing when they engage in thought experiments. And, philosophy done well should do this. Suppose you have an intuition about a certain case, then first of all – this is a point that Frank Jackson has made – you could see publishing that as a kind of experiment. People like Stich criticise people like Jackson, and Stich has explicitly criticised Jackson saying he's doing experiments within one subject, just himself. But 15 For one of the classical examples of this kind of study, see Isen and Levin (1972). - 96 - We're All Folk: An Interview with Neil Levy about Experimental Philosophy and Conceptual Analysis 97 Jackson says \"Think about the Gettier case, for instance, and you can see that as a kind of experiment.\" Gettier has this intuition that there are cases of true belief that aren't knowledge. But then he sends it off to a journal, and that's a bit of an experiment – we're testing now to see if the referees share the intuition. And then it's published and now we're testing to see at large whether philosophers have the intuition. And it turns out that it's a really staggeringly successful experiment, that of all the philosophers who read the paper, as far as I know, only one has not had the intuition: Stephen Hetherington. Everybody else \"Ah yes, he's right.\" So, you need to see knowledge in general, all of it, not just philosophy as a distributed process. That's one of my common themes. That's one thing. The second thing is that we do need to pay more attention to the minor variations than we have. One legitimate thing to do, and one important thing to do if you get a thought experiment that generates a certain intuition, is to try to see whether the features that generate that intuition really are the ones that are philosophically important. It might be something trivial, like the dime, that is doing the work. But I think, again, philosophy is a distributed process and we know a lot about, say, Gettier case, because people have come up with lots and lots of different variations, and they haven't made the effect go away. Y.K. – Fair enough. Thank you very much indeed. N.L. – Thank you. It's interesting material, isn't it? It's philosophical methodology, and experimental methodology, and thank you for giving me the opportunity to think about it because I think I'm getting clearer on it myself. References Balaguer, M. (2009). The metaphysical irrelevance of the compatibilism debate (and, more generally, of conceptual analysis). Southern Journal of Philosophy, 47, 1–24. Baumeister, R. F., Masicampo, E. J., & DeWall, C. N. (2009). Prosocial benefits of feeling free: Disbelief in free will increases aggression and reduces helpfulness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 260–268. Horowitz, T. (1998). Philosophical Intuitions and Psychological Theory. Ethics, 108, 367– 385. Isen, A. M. & Levin, P. F. (1972). Effect of feeling good on helping: Cookies and kindness Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21, 384–388. Kamm, F. M. (1998). Moral intuitions, cognitive psychology, and the harming-versus-notaiding distinction. Ethics, 108, 463–488. Kauppinen, A. (2007). The rise and fall of experimental philosophy. Philosophical Explorations, 10, 95–118. Knobe, J. (2003a). Intentional action and side effects in ordinary language. Analysis, 63, 190–194. - 97 - 98 Neil Levy and Yasuko Kitano Vol. 19 Knobe, J. (2003b). Intentional action in folk psychology: An experimental investigation. Philosophical Psychology, 16, 309–325. Knobe, J. (2004). Intention, intentional action and moral considerations. Analysis, 64, 181– 187. Knobe, J. (2006a). The concept of intentional action: A case study in the uses of folk psychology. Philosophical Studies, 130, 203–231. Knobe, J. (2006b). The folk concepts of intention and intentional action: A cross-cultural study. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 6, 113–132. Levy, N. (2002a). Being Up-To-Date: Foucault, Sartre and Postmodernity, New York: Peter Lang. Levy, N. (2002b). Moral Relativism, Oxford: Oneworld. Levy, N. (2002c). Sartre, Oxford: Oneworld. Levy, N. (2004). What Makes us Moral? Crossing the Boundaries of Biology, Oxford: Oneworld. Levy, N. (2007). Neuroethics: Philosophical Challenges for the 21st Century, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Levy, N. (forthcoming 2011). Hard Luck: How Luck Undermines Free Will and Moral Responsibility, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Mele, A.R. (2006). Free Will and Luck, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Nahmias, E. (2009). Why 'willusionism' leads to 'bad results': Comments on Baumeister, Crescioni, and Alquist. Neuroethics. Prinz, J. J. (2008). Empirical philosophy and experimental philosophy. In: Knobe, J. & Nichols, S. (eds.), Experimental Philosophy, (pp.189–208). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Roskies, A. L. & Nichols, S. (2008). Bringing moral responsibility down to earth. Journal of Philosophy, 105, 371–388. Vohs, K. D. & Shooler, J. W. (2008). The value of believing in free will: Encouraging a belief in determinism increases cheating. Psychological Science, 19, 49–54. Williamson, T. (2007). The Philosophy of Philosophy, Malden MA: Blackwell. (Received 2010.1.27; Revised 2010.6.7; Revised 2010.10.15; Accepted 2011.1.14) - 98 -"}
{"meta": {"title": "Wendy's Risky Role-Play and the Gory Plot of the Okefenokee Man-Monster", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/article", "creator": "Klintberg, Bo C.", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "CATEGORY: Philosophy play; historical fiction; comedy; social criticism.\n           \n          \n          STORYLINE: Katherine, a neurotic American lawyer, meets Christianus for a philosophy session at The Late Victorian coffee shop in London, where they also meet Wendy the waitress and Baldy the player. Will Katherine be able to overcome her deep depression by adopting some of Christianus’s satisfactionist ideas? Or will she stay unsatisfied and unhappy by stubbornly sticking to her own neti-neti nothingness philosophy? And what roles do Baldy, Wendy, and the Okefenokee Man-Monster have in this connexion?\n          \n          \n          TOPICS: In the course of this philosophy play, Katherine and Christianus discuss many things: friendship, a Renoir painting, global warming, elephant conservation, freemasons, Prince of Wales and his tiger-hunting experience in Nepal, Victorian Chartism and a Kennington Common daguerreotype, a Mortality Proof, and, last but not least, Baldy, Wendy, and the gory plot of the Okefenokee Man-Monster.\n           \n          \n          NOTES: This work features elaborate footnotes and comments (including full bibliographical references) by the author, to enhance the reader's experience of the play and its philosophizing characters.", "date": "2012", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/KLIWRR", "language": "zz", "datestamp": "2019-03-28T09:44:55Z"}, "text": "Philosophical Play: Wendy's Risky Role-Play and the Gory Plot of the Okefenokee Man-Monster, BO C. KLINTBERG 1–238 VOLUME 2, NUMBER –2 APRIL 202 Philosophical Plays * P H I L O S O P H I C A L P L A Y S * A N N O 2 0 0 8 ISSN 654-6296 (print) . ISSN 654-6318 (online) SCENE I. Too Late for a Lady of the Law 1 SCENE II. Boy Lies with Girl 10 SCENE III. Backstage Drama 19 SCENE IV. A Really Relaxing Rendezvous 55 SCENE V. Baldy's Barbie-Babes 64 SCENE VI. The Owen Problem 84 SCENE VII. Just Follow the Money 94 SCENE VIII. Katherine Has a Heart 107 SCENE IX. Elephant Friends Forever 132 SCENE X. Incommensurability 145 SCENE XI. The Fat Rat 156 SCENE XII. Localization or Globalization? 171 SCENE XIII. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 193 SCENE XIV. A Moribund Mortality Proof 204 SCENE XV. The Okefenokee Man-Monster 215 SCENE XVI. Some Conclusive Costume Talk 230 IN THIS ISSUE:\n\nPhilosophical Play: Wendy's Risky Role-Play and the Gory Plot of the Okefenokee Man-Monster, BO C. KLINTBERG 1–238 VOLUME 2, NUMBER –2 APRIL 202 Philosophical Plays ISSN 654-6296 (print) . ISSN 654-6318 (online) SCENE I. Too Late for a Lady of the Law 1 SCENE II. Boy Lies with Girl 10 SCENE III. Backstage Drama 19 SCENE IV. A Really Relaxing Rendezvous 55 SCENE V. Baldy's Barbie-Babes 64 SCENE VI. The Owen Problem 84 SCENE VII. Just Follow the Money 94 SCENE VIII. Katherine Has a Heart 107 SCENE IX. Elephant Friends Forever 132 SCENE X. Incommensurability 145 SCENE XI. The Fat Rat 156 SCENE XII. Localization or Globalization? 171 SCENE XIII. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 193 SCENE XIV. A Moribund Mortality Proof 204 SCENE XV. The Okefenokee Man-Monster 215 SCENE XVI. Some Conclusive Costume Talk 230 IN THIS ISSUE: * P H I L O S O P H I C A L P L A Y S * A N N O 2 0 0 8 PUBLISHED BY: Bo C. Klintberg FOUNDER, AUTHOR, EDITOR: Bo C. Klintberg ART DIRECTION & TYPOGRAPHY: Bo C. Klintberg ONLINE EDITION (OPEN ARCHIVE): http://www.philosophicalplays.com ISSN: 654-638 PRINT EDITION (FREE PDFs): http://www.philosophicalplays.com ISSN: 654-6296 COPYRIGHT: All published material in Philosophical Plays, both in the print edition and in the online edition, is Copyright © 202 by Bo C. Klintberg. All rights reserved. No part of these publications may be reproduced, or republished, or stored in a retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the author. PERMISSIONS: For inquiries about permission to reproduce, or to republish, or to store in a retrieval system, the material appearing in either the print edition or the online edition of Philosophical Plays, kindly write the author at the e-mail address provided below. CORRESPONDENCE: philosophicalplays.editor [at] gmail [dot] com Wendy's Risky Role-Play and the Gory Plot of the Okefenokee Man-Monster BO C. KLINTBERG SCENE I. Too Late for a Lady of the Law  KATHERINE: Hey Chris . . . you're late! 2 CHRISTIANUS: Well, what did you expect? This is not The Early Victorian, is it? 3 KATHERINE: No. But . . . Copyright © 202 Bo C. Klintberg. All rights reserved. Bo C. Klintberg (202), Wendy's Risky Role-Play and the Gory Plot of the Okefenokee Man-Monster. Philosophical Plays, VOL. 2, NO. 1–2 (APRIL 202): –238. CHARACTERS: Christianus, a satisfactionist Katherine, a lawyer Wendy, a waitress Baldy, a player Selma, an old lady Thelma, another old lady The scene throughout is at a coffee shop in London; it's 10:15, Friday, March 23, 2007. 4 CHRISTIANUS: I know, I know. I am sorry, Katherine. I didn't plan coming late. But some last-minute matters came up. 5 KATHERINE: Nothing serious, I hope? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Well, national food policy issues are always serious. But personal ones are even more so. So here I am! 7 KATHERINE: That's the spirit! I am really glad you could make it! 8 CHRISTIANUS: Likewise. So what do you think about this place? 9 KATHERINE: It looks great! 0 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, and they have some a-m-az-i-n-g coffee! 2 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 1:1, you're late: This meeting was scheduled for 10 a.m. See Christianus and Katherine's discussion at xv1:24–37 in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, pp. 97–98). BO C. KLINTBERG (2008a), Katherine's Questionable Quest for Love and Happiness in Philosophical Plays, vol. 1, no. 1. 1:6, national food policy issues: This comment may have been related in some way to the proposed change in screenplay writing and production standards suggested by the Republican FCC commissioner Deborah Tate, who, according to Brooks Boliek, in a move to decrease childhood obesity, 'wants celery and carrots to get equal TV time with doughnuts and candy bars' (Boliek 2007). Tate said that, '[t]he story line should include healthful messages and activities' (Boliek 2007). It is also interesting to note that although the article apparently was written by Brooks Boliek at 1 p.m. EST on 22 March 2007, it was not released (at least not with the same title) until 7:58 p.m. EST on 22 March 2007, after which it again was released at 2:54 a.m. EST on 23 March 2007, presumably with minor corrections. It may also be relevant to note that their UK archive [http://uk.reuters.com] has a similar article, dated 22 March 2007, 5:00 GMT, but only released once. Therefore, if this is the food policy issue that Christianus is referring to, there were many opportunities for him to see this information, just on Reuters. BROOKS BOLIEK (2007), 'FCC Member wants more fruits, vegetables on TV'. Reuters, Friday, 23 March 2007,  KATHERINE: So I've heard. The only problem is that it's crowded! 2 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm, yes. But let's go in anyway. You can't see everything from the street. 3 KATHERINE: Sure, sometimes one has to investigate things from some other location or perspective to get the whole story. Or at least more of the story. 4 CHRISTIANUS: Thy words are wise, my dear Lady of the Law! 5 KATHERINE: No wiser than those that thou speak'st, my dear Sage of Satisfaction! 6 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! You're funny! 3Too Late for a Lady of the Law 2:54 a.m. EDT. Online article retrieved from the Reuters website [http://www. reuters.com] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. 1:6, food policy . . . always serious: If Christianus's serious food policy issue was connected to the ideas presented in Boliek's article (Boliek 2007; ref. supra, note 'food policy' at 1:6), Christianus might have responded to FCC's representative something like this, having Table 37 ('Modifications of public policies that would promote better food choices and more active lifestyles') in mind (Nestle 2002, p. 367): 'If childhood obesity, or any obesity, really is the issue, why propose equal TV time? Why not just prohibit the exposure of all unhealthy foods and practices on air, or at least decrease their time on air radically? And why not implement the rest of Marion Nestle's Food Politics recommendations as well, while you're at it?' MARION NESTLE (2002), Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health. Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press. 1:15, thou: The pronoun 'thou', derived from Old English (for OE pronoun paradigms, see Lockwood 1975, p. 184), is a word that might be understood as 'you'. It has been used in Early Modern and Elizabethan English, and also in 'most of the modern dialects of England' (Wright and Wright 1973, pp. 159–160), although (most of ) its later use probably should be understood as being 'archaic' and therefore mainly 'poetic' or 'literary'. However, it is not immediately clear how 7 KATHERINE: You too. 8 CHRISTIANUS: Shall we? 9 KATHERINE: Sure. I am freezing! 20 CHRISTIANUS: After you, mademoiselle! 2 KATHERINE: Thanks, but why don't you go first, since you know the place? 22 CHRISTIANUS: OK. Just be careful with the door here. It's really heavy. 23 KATHERINE: Uff! Uh! You're right. And squeaky! 24 CHRISTIANUS: Indeed. 25 KATHERINE: But still charming! 26 CHRISTIANUS: Well . . . 4 and when one might use it, since the word 'you' also might be used, but not always interchangeably. In fact, it is that (potentially) non-interchangeable aspect of these words that playwrights such as Shakespeare sometimes use to display, in a more explicit way, the shifting roles and relations that the characters are going through. Thus, Foakes is right to point out that speakers sometimes (e.g. in King Lear) do signal changes in their relationships when they suddenly start using 'thou' instead of 'you', or vice versa (Foakes 1997, pp. 7–8). However, Foakes's simple categorization of the word 'you' as 'the common, more neutral form' (Foakes 1997, p. 7) might be troublesome: for what does 'common' and 'neutral' mean? If, for example, we would take 'neutral' to mean 'less emotional' or 'unemotional' or 'emotionally disengaged', we would still not be able to explain cases such as the example in Abbott's Shakespearian Grammar where one seemingly should use 'you' even in a more passionate (i.e., less 'neutral') utterance: 'When the appellative \"sir\" is used, even in anger, thou generally gives place to you' (Abbott 1883, p. 155). Therefore, it may be better (at least in the beginning stages) to simply avoid Foakes's attempt to offer a simple categorization and instead go directly to Barber (1993, pp. 186–187) or Wright and Wright (1973, pp. 159–160) for a better, but still not entirely unproblematic, introduction. The serious student can then continue to Abbott's more detailed account and its many examples (Abbott 1883), after which he also may consider using the concise 'thou' entry in Onions as a convenient 'Abbott reminder' (Onions 1966, p. 255). Wendy's Risky Role-Play 27 KATHERINE: Aaah! 28 CHRISTIANUS: What? 29 KATHERINE: It's warm in here! 30 CHRISTIANUS: It sure is. With so many people, how could it not be? 3 KATHERINE: Right. But I'm not complaining. I like it hot. 32 CHRISTIANUS: Me too. 33 KATHERINE: And I absolutely adore that classical music! 34 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, it's quite popular. 35 KATHERINE: What is it? 5 Consulting these resources, it might then not be unreasonable to take Katherine's usage of 'thou', in this particular context, not as a gesture of any 'goodhumoured superiority' towards a servant, but simply as an 'affection' towards a friend (Abbott 1883, pp. 153–154; cf. Onions 1966, p. 225). But if that is the case, why does she - and Christianus - switch back to 'you' soon after? Is there no more affection on the table? Or are the times a-changing? E. A. ABBOTT (1883), A Shakespearian Grammar: An Attempt to Illustrate Some of the Differences Between Elizabethan and Modern English. New edition. London: Macmillan. CHARLES BARBER (1993), The English Language: A Historical Introduction. Cambridge Approaches to Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. R. A. FOAKES (1997), 'Introduction' in William Shakespeare, King Lear. High Holborn: Arden Shakespeare, pp. 1–151. W. B. LOCKWOOD (1975), Languages of the British Isles Past and Present. London: André Deutsch. C. T. ONIONS (1966), A Shakespeare Glossary. Second edition, revised. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press. JOSEPH WRIGHT AND ELIZABETH MARY WRIGHT (1973), An Elementary Middle English Grammar. Second edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1:34, it's quite popular: Christianus here seems to be talking about the current state of affairs in this particular coffee shop, in terms of what customers generally are saying about the music when they visit. But serious historians should, of course, be very careful not to conclude from this statement that clasToo Late for a Lady of the Law 36 CHRISTIANUS: I am not sure. I wasn't part of the music committee. But it's definitely something late nineteenth-centuryish. 37 KATHERINE: How do you know that, if you don't know what it is? 38 CHRISTIANUS: It just follows naturally. 39 KATHERINE: From what? 40 CHRISTIANUS: From the premises. 6 sical music was very popular in Christianus's time; for in the beginning of the twenty-first century, only a relatively small percentage of the population actively listened to classical music. Also, one should probably not understand Christianus's statement as having anything to do with the preferences of the general population in (late) Victorian times. Although classical music certainly was promoted in different forms by associations such as the Philharmonic Society in London (see infra, note 'late Victorian classical music at 1:42) and by the (in 1883) newly inaugurated Royal College of Music (with its 50 students, selected from 1,588 local candidates, studying pianoforte, singing, violin, composition, violoncello, organ, clarinet, flute, and harp; see Musical Times 1883), classical music was probably not the most popular type of music for the middle class. The exact 'composition' of what the middle class liked may remain unknown, but there are still a few points one could make. In terms of commercial interest and 'popular culture', the (London) music hall and its nightly entertainment, including its 'song, dance, comic routine, acrobats, and animal acts' (Faulk 2004, p. 1) must be mentioned. Other popular music events were Gilbert and Sullivan's playful operas at the Savoy, which, according to Wood, 'will always be associated with the late Victorian age' (Wood 1982, p. 285) and, according to George Rowell, their popularity so lasting that 'for modern audiences Savoy Opera and the Victorian theatre have largely become synonymous' (Rowell 1978, p. 95). But we shall not forget that also many late Victorian musical adventures simply were had at home, around the piano (Harwood 2009, p. 22), or in other small groups of people coming together in various locations, such as in those 'singing classes' and 'temperance bands' that Dave Russell mentions (Russell 1987, p. 18). BARRY J. FAULK (2004), Music Hall and Modernity: The Late-Victorian Discovery of Popular Culture. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press. JEREMY HARWOOD (2009), Looking Back at Britain: Holidays and Hard Times – 1870s. London: Reader's Digest. MUSICAL TIMES (1883), 'The Inauguration of the Royal College of Music (1 June 1883)'. Reprinted (partly, with Wendy's Risky Role-Play 4 KATHERINE: What premises? 42 CHRISTIANUS: Well, if you know that they must not play anything but late Victorian classical music, then what else could it be? 43 KATHERINE: Hmmm. No exceptions? 44 CHRISTIANUS: Well, when the place is closed, the staff can play whatever they want, 7 omissions) in J. M. Golby, ed., Culture and Society in Britain 1850–1890: A Source Book of Contemporary Writings. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 228–231. GEORGE ROWELL (1978), The Victorian Theatre 1792–1914. Second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. DAVE RUSSELL (1987), Popular Music in England, 1840–1914: A Social History. Manchester: Manchester University Press. ANTHONY WOOD (1982), Nineteenth Century Britain: 1815–1914. Harlow: Longman. 1:42, late Victorian classical music: What is the significance of the phrase 'late Victorian', in connexion with the term 'classical music' and the role it plays at the coffee house? One way to interpret this expression might be to propose that the kind of classical music that was played there was the one that was composed sometime during that era. In this case, one could then include works such as, for example, César Franck's Symphony in D minor (1888), Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony (1888), and Arnold Schoenberg's Verklärte Nacht (1899), as mentioned in Grout and Palisca (1988, p. 666). Another way to interpret this expression might be to suggest that the kind of classical music that was played there was the one that was performed in the late Victorian era, whether it was composed in that era or not. One could then list, for example, the works performed by the Philharmonic Society at its First Concert (of the season) at St. James's Hall on Thursday, 23 March 1876, as reported by the Illustrated London News (1876a, p. 310), including Mendelssohn's overture 'The Isles of Fingal', Weber's overture 'Euryanthe', Schumann's symphony in C, and Beethoven's pianoforte concerto in G. However, the full programme that Thursday evening, as Foster has recorded it (Foster 1912, p. 354), also included works by Mozart, Stradella, Chopin, Hiller, Taubert, and Brahms. MYLES BIRKET FOSTER (1912), The History of the Philharmonic Society of London: 1813–1912; A Record of a Hundred Years' Work in the Cause of Music. London: John Lane. DONALD JAY GROUT AND CLAUDE V. PALISCA (1988), A History of Western Music. Fourth edition. New York and London: W. W. Norton & Company. ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876a), Saturday, 25 March 1876, vol. 68, no. 1913. Too Late for a Lady of the Law if they just keep the volume down. But when it's open, it has to be Victorian. Late Victorian. 45 KATHERINE: I see. 46 CHRISTIANUS: But now, ta-ta-ta-taaa-ta-tataaaaaa! 47 KATHERINE: What? 48 CHRISTIANUS: I have a surprise for you! 49 KATHERINE: You do? 50 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. We just have to cross the room. 5 KATHERINE: How can we? It's so crowded! 52 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, I know. Which is why I'll ask Baldy and his basketball buddies to move their butts. 53 KATHERINE: OK. Just be polite. 54 CHRISTIANUS: Sir? 55 BALDY: Yes? 56 CHRISTIANUS: Can you and your friends excuse us? 57 BALDY: Uh . . . ? 58 CHRISTIANUS: We just want to take a look at the wall over there, behind you. But neither of us is seven feet tall. So maybe we could trade places? 59 BALDY: Oh, I see! Sure, no problem! We can 8 Wendy's Risky Role-Play hang out at the statue instead. 60 CHRISTIANUS: Great! Thanks, mate! 6 KATHERINE: Thanks! 62 BALDY: My pleasure. 63 CHRISTIANUS: Was I polite enough? 64 KATHERINE: Yes. Very nice! 65 CHRISTIANUS: Good. So here it is! 9Too Late for a Lady of the Law SCENE II. Boy Lies with Girl  KATHERINE: A mural? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. It's apparently one of those Victorian fresco projects. 3 KATHERINE: Fantastic! 4 CHRISTIANUS: But not very off-the-wall. 5 KATHERINE: It obviously wasn't meant to be. 6 CHRISTIANUS: That's the problem. 7 KATHERINE: Problem? There's no problem. It's beautiful! What an artist! Just look at all that marble! 11:2, Victorian fresco projects: Christianus may, for example, think of some 'representative' Victorian art projects that involved murals. One such ambitious project involved the planned production of many murals in London's Westminster Palace, 'intended to give an impetus to a revival of the art of historical painting in general, and of fresco painting in particular' (Kurzer 2006, p. 139). However, according to Ormond, the only frescoes produced having 'any real expressive power' - although their lustre faded rather quickly (cf. Kurzer 2006, p. 146), perhaps due to the 'mania' of trying to produce historically 'authentic portraits' (Strong 2004, pp. 91– 93; cf. Vaughan 1983, p. 756) - were the panoramic military-history murals The Meeting of Wellington and Blücher at Waterloo and The Death of Nelson in the Royal Gallery, completed by Daniel Maclise, R.A. (1806–1870) in 1863 and 1865 (Kurzer 2006, p. 147), or, alternatively, sometime during the last twelve years of his life (Ormond 1968, pp. 691–692). Another ambitious art project was the group of twelve wall paintings (eight of which are true frescoes, the others oil on canvas) in Alfred Waterhouse's Great Hall of Manchester Town Hall, finished in 1893 by Ford Madox Brown (1821– 1893) - in Farr's estimation, 'the most ambitious civic commission of its kind in the nineteenth century' (Farr 1978, p. 328). DENNIS FARR (1978), The Oxford Histo8 CHRISTIANUS: I'm looking. 9 KATHERINE: It's very Italian, wouldn't you say? 0 CHRISTIANUS: Or Roman.  KATHERINE: Right. And so horizontal! 2 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Horizontal is the word. 3 KATHERINE: And romantic! 4 CHRISTIANUS: Boy lies with girl? 5 KATHERINE: Absolutely! 6 CHRISTIANUS: But do we have to conclude that there is romance at work here? Is that what you are pleading, Miss Lawyer? 7 KATHERINE: You mean there isn't? 8 CHRISTIANUS: What if he is gay? Or she is les11 ry of English Art, vol. x1: English Art 1870– 1949. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press. FREDERICK KURZER (2006), 'Herbert Church FRS and the Palace of Westminster Frescoes' in Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 139–159. RICHARD ORMOND (1968), 'Daniel Maclise' in The Burlington Magazine, vol. 110, no. 789 [Special Issue Commemorating the Bicentenary of the Royal Academy (1768–1968)], pp. 684–693. ROY STRONG (2004), Painting the Past: The Victorian Painter and British History. London: Pimlico. WILLIAM VAUGHAN (1983), 'Romanticism' in Lawrence Gowing, ed., A History of Art. London: Macmillan, pp. 745–768. 11:6, That's the problem: The idea here might be that there is something unsatisfactory about art that is not, to some extent at least, off-the-wall. Maybe Christianus wants to say that art that is created to be 'historically accurate' does not guarantee that it is really satisfying - and perhaps especially so if also the motif is too ordinary, or otherwise 'too easily digested' by the audience. 11:12, Horizontal is the word: It is easy to imagine that the mural's width would be greater than its height and therefore would be horizontal in a gross physical sense. But this comment by Christianus seems to suggest that there are certain pictorial elements of that mural that contribute to its 'horizontality'. Boy Lies with Girl bian? 9 KATHERINE: Well, I'm not . . . 20 CHRISTIANUS: Or what if she doesn't like men with moustaches? Or with teal-coloured scarves wrapped around their heads? 2 KATHERINE: But . . . 22 CHRISTIANUS: Or what if it's just the prelude 12 11:20, men with moustaches: Why has this artist chosen to equip the depicted male with a moustache? One answer, of course, could be that the artist himself just liked it that way, regardless of what any future audience might think. Another answer could be that moustaches were quite popular in late Victorian times, and that the artist therefore consciously used that type of facial barbering to make his paintings more palatable for his potential customers. For if the frequency with which moustacheequipped men are found in the illustrations in the Illustrated London News from 1842 and onwards are indicative of the contemporary taste of the general population, we might take note of Dwight E. Robinson's research (Robinson 1976, Fig. 1, p. 1135). His study shows that moustaches were rather steadily increasing in popularity from 1842 (3% of all depicted men had moustaches) until about 1917 (60%), after which the trend went the other way, ending in 1972 (6%). Noteworthy is also that sideburns (without moustaches) had been on the decline since 1842 (40%), and was down to nil at the time of the peak of moustaches in 1917. For more on moustaches, see, for example, SCENE v ('The Mustachio Man') in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, pp. 27–32; ref. supra, note 'you're late' at 1:1). DWIGHT E. ROBINSON (1976), 'Fashions in Shaving and Trimming of the Beard: The Men of the Illustrated London News, 1842–1972' in American Journal of Sociology, vol. 81, no. 5, pp. 1133–1141. 11:20, teal-coloured scarves: The idea of 'teal-coloured scarves' may lead one in the direction of Lawrence Alma-Tadema (1836–1912), who seemingly was fond of men with various pieces of cloth wrapped around their heads, as seen in, for example, The Triumph of Titus (see Ash 1989, frontispiece; Barrow 2001, p. 118) and Anthony and Cleopatra (see Academy Editions 1977, Plate 27). Considering also Katherine's and Christianus's comments about the marble, the horizontality, the Italian-Roman milieu, and the potential romance at work, a fair guess would be that the mural is a reproduction of the scene in Alma-Tadema's 1876 work Pleading (see Barrow 2001, p. 86; Standing 1905, plate facing p. 120; Kern 1996, p. 9). However, there are similarities between Pleading and his 1877 work A Question (see Academy Editions 1977, Plate 21) as Wendy's Risky Role-Play to a one-night, or perhaps in this case, a one-midday, stand? 23 KATHERINE: All right, all right. You made your point. But I still think the style is very classy. 24 CHRISTIANUS: Or at least classical. And clean. 25 KATHERINE: And very nice! 13 both Pieri and Barrow notes (Pieri 2005, pp. 69–70; Barrow 2001, p. 85), as well as between Pleading and his 1883 work Xanthe and Phaon (see Barrow 2001, p. 87) as Barrow notes (Barrow 2001, p. 85); but neither A Question nor Xanthe and Phaon features any teal-coloured scarf. And even though there also are similarities between Pleading and AlmaTadema's 1877 work Flora: Spring in the Gardens of Villa Borghese (see Ash 1989, Plate 7) as Ash notes (Ash 1989, p. facing Plate 7), the teal-coloured piece of cloth depicted in Flora is not wrapped around the head of a man. Finally, one may here also add that if the mural does depict the Pleading scene, Katherine's idea about it would be closer to the 'proposal composition' idea that Kern presents (Kern 1996, pp. 7–9) than to any of the considerably less romantic alternatives that Christianus seemingly has in mind. RUSSELL ASH (1989), Sir Lawrence AlmaTadema. New York: Harry N. Abrams. ACADEMY EDITIONS (1977), AlmaTadema. London: Academy Editions. R. J. BARROW (2001), Lawrence AlmaTadema. London: Phaidon. STEPHEN KERN (1996), Eyes of Love: The Gaze in English and French Paintings and Novels 1840–1900. London: Reaktion Books. GIULIANA PIERI (2005), The Influence of Pre-Raphaelitism on Fin de siècle Italy. MHRA Texts and Dissertations, vol. 65. London: Maney Publishing for the Modern Humanities Research Association. PERCY CROSS STANDING (1905), Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema, O.M., R.A. London: Cassell and Company. 11:24, classical . . . clean: Christianus seems to say that the scene of the mural, in some sense, is 'classical' and 'clinically clean', and, perhaps also, that it is that 'cleanness' or 'classicalness' (or both) that makes it not (very) classy from a satisfactionist's point of view - a stance that may coincide somewhat with Peter Fuller's, who notes Alma-Tadema's 'necrophiliac obsession with archaeological accuracy and marble surfaces' (Fuller 1989, p. 179) and also quotes a correspondent in the Art Journal who not only thinks that Ruskin's evaluation of Alma-Tadema's works as vacuous is correct, but also goes on to explain that their vacuity are 'due to their complete denial of spirituality' (Fuller 1989, p. 180). On such a reading, Christianus might not be very shocked to learn that Alma-Tadema's Boy Lies with Girl 26 CHRISTIANUS: If you don't think too much about it. 27 KATHERINE: Hmmm. So who made it? 28 CHRISTIANUS: Owen did. 29 KATHERINE: Owen? 30 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. He's the boss here. 3 KATHERINE: Is he also a professional artist? 32 CHRISTIANUS: No. 33 KATHERINE: An amateur artist, then? 34 CHRISTIANUS: Not even that. 35 KATHERINE: I don't get it. 36 CHRISTIANUS: It's simple. He has no artistic sense or sensibility. At all. 37 KATHERINE: But didn't you just say that he made the mural? 38 CHRISTIANUS: I did. But it's a long story. 39 KATHERINE: I have lots of time. 14 house in St. John's Wood 'seemed like a realisation of one of his own paintings' (Denvir 1986, p. 8) with all the Roman paraphernalia imaginable, including so highly polished marble floors 'that visitors were provided with slippers to avoid accidents' (Denvir 1986, p. 9). BERNARD DENVIR (1986), The Late Victorians: Art, Design and Society, 1852– 1910. London and New York: Longman. PETER FULLER (1989), 'Fine Arts' in Boris Ford, ed., The Cambridge Cultural History of Britain, vol. 7: Victorian Britain. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, pp. 162–207. 11:26, think too much: Alma-Tadema once laid forth some of his thoughts on art: 'Art must be beautiful because Art must elevate, not teach; when Art teaches, in the common sense of the word, it becomes accessory to some other object' (Zimmern 1886, p. 28) - a stance that seems intimately linked with his statements that '[w]e are no longer . . . the people of the religion of death' and Wendy's Risky Role-Play 40 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. But do you also have the stamina to stand up while I'm narrating the whole thing? 4 KATHERINE: Probably not. 42 CHRISTIANUS: So let's find ourselves a table first. 43 KATHERINE: If we can. It's so crowded. 44 CHRISTIANUS: It really is. In fact, I have never seen anything like it! Normally, at this time of day, there is always at least one free table in this room. 45 KATHERINE: Maybe it's some public holiday or something? 46 CHRISTIANUS: Not that I am aware of. 47 KATHERINE: But are you aware of all of them? 48 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe not. After all, it's Friday. 49 KATHERINE: I'm sorry? '[w]e now look out for cheerful things' (Zimmern 1886, p. 28). His overall idea seems to be that the audience should not think so much (especially not about death), but simply enjoy the artwork, since that process (alone?) 'ennobles the mind' (Zimmern 1886, p. 28). Christianus's comment may here signal that he is aware of Alma-Tadema's philosophy of art, but dismisses it, wholly or partly. HELEN ZIMMERN (1886), L. Alma Tadema: His Life and Work in The Life and Work of Sir Frederick Leighton, Bart., Sir John E. Millais, Bart., L. Alma Tadema. London: Art Journal Office. 11:29, Owen? It seems clear from the ongoing discussion that Katherine has not seen this motif before, neither in its original form nor in the form of a reproduction, with or without being legally licensed by Alma-Tadema (Verhoogt 2007, p. 443). So why is she hesitant here? Is it simply because she has never heard of Owen before? Or is it because she doesn't believe that he, or perhaps anyone with 15Boy Lies with Girl 50 CHRISTIANUS: You should have been at my little brown-bag meeting yesterday. Then you would have understood it. 5 KATHERINE: But you said, very explicitly, that you didn't want to see me yesterday. 52 CHRISTIANUS: Did I? 53 KATHERINE: Yes. 54 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. 55 KATHERINE: So what would I have understood, if I had been there? 56 CHRISTIANUS: That Friday is the day of Venus, according to the classical tradition. 57 KATHERINE: How is that relevant? 58 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it's just that my omniscience usually works quite poorly on venerean days, especially before breakfast. So it could be some sort of holiday today, even though I am not immediately aware of it. 59 KATHERINE: But? 16 such a name, (originally) made, or even could have made, that mural? ROBERT VERHOOGT (2007), Art in Reproduction: Nineteenth-Century Prints after Lawrence Alma-Tadema, Jozef Israëls and Ary Scheffer. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. 11:51, didn't want to see me: Two days earlier Christianus told Katherine that he could not see her on Thursday, for he had already scheduled a meeting with Tim, a physics professor. And Katherine seems to remember that discussion well. See xv1:24–27 in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, p. 97; ref. supra, note 'you're late' at 1:1). 11:56, Friday . . . Venus: For more information on the connexion between the word 'Friday' and the word 'Venus', see note 'Venus-day' at 111:61 in TSG Wendy's Risky Role-Play 60 CHRISTIANUS: But even if it were some unfamiliar holiday, it still wouldn't explain all those unfamiliar faces. I go here all the time, and I usually recognize most of the people hanging out here. 6 KATHERINE: But maybe it has to do with that special offer they advertised outside? 62 CHRISTIANUS: What special offer? 63 KATHERINE: The offer which I had lots of time to read, since you were so late. 64 CHRISTIANUS: Which was? 65 KATHERINE: The poster said, 'Friday ONLY!' And then, below that . . . 66 CHRISTIANUS: Yes? 67 KATHERINE: . . . 'The return of the popular Cookie Monster Treat. Four home-made cookies and unlimited coffee refills for only £6.' 68 CHRISTIANUS: Ah! It's one of those 'Monster' 17 (Klintberg 2008b, pp. 27–30). BO C. KLINTBERG (2008b), Tim's Sexy Girl-Goddess and the Tale of the British Raisin in Philosophical Plays, vol. 1, no. 2. 11:58, venerean: Though the word 'venerean' might be understood in a purely sexual way, one may doubt that Christianus is here using it in that fashion. Perhaps it rather should be understood in a more general sense, as 'relating or pertaining to Venus or her service' (Little 1980, p. 2460). WILLIAM LITTLE, H. W. FOWLER, AND JESSIE COULSON (1980), The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary on Historical Principles, vol. 11 (Marl–Z and Addenda). Revised and edited by C. T. Onions. Third edition completely reset with etymologies revised by G. W. S. Friedrichsen and with revised addenda. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Boy Lies with Girl days! That explains it! Or at least some of it. 69 KATHERINE: Really? 70 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, last time they had it they got so many new customers that they almost doubled their sales. 7 KATHERINE: Wow. 72 CHRISTIANUS: So it's a smart thing to do, business-wise. Once and a while. 73 KATHERINE: But it's a little inconvenient for us. 74 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. A little. 75 KATHERINE: So what do we do now? 18 Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE III. Backstage Drama  CHRISTIANUS: Let's have a look at the other rooms. 2 KATHERINE: They have other rooms? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 4 KATHERINE: How many? 5 CHRISTIANUS: Three. If you count the restroom. 6 KATHERINE: They only have one restroom? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Isn't one enough? Do you need two? Or three? 8 KATHERINE: Not as long as one is working and no-one else is in it. 9 CHRISTIANUS: Right. So if you ever need it, it's this Notting Hill-blue door here. Even if you're not Anna Scott. 0 KATHERINE: No, I'm definitely not a Scot. But I am American.  CHRISTIANUS: But not a damsel in any orangejuice distress, I take it? 2 KATHERINE: Actually I am. 3 CHRISTIANUS: You are? But your sweater looks clean. 4 KATHERINE: Well, it's an internal kind of distress. 5 CHRISTIANUS: Internal? 6 KATHERINE: Yes. I drank at least half a gallon of orange juice just before I came here. 7 CHRISTIANUS: Holy Krishna! I hope it wasn't commercially produced, at least? With all that mold and stuff? 8 KATHERINE: No, no. I made a special order. They even had organic Florida oranges. Just like home! So I couldn't stop myself. 9 CHRISTIANUS: Well, then, I guess, you really are in some sort of juice jeopardy, after all. 20 KATHERINE: Yes. 2 CHRISTIANUS: So what are you waiting for? Why don't you go in? 22 KATHERINE: It's occupied! 23 CHRISTIANUS: Oh dear! 20 111:9, Notting Hill-blue door: This is presumably a reference to the motion picture Notting Hill (1999), and to the colour of that blue front door, behind which one (still) may find William Thacker's - and Spike's, of course - somewhat messy apartment. The door pops up several times in the movie, both as an entry point leading Anna Scott (Julia Roberts) into William's (Hugh Grant) more private life, as well as an exit point leading her out of it. On both of these occasions, it is Anna's distressful condition that triggers her move through that blueish, wooden Stargate. NOTTING HILL (1999), starring Hugh Grant, Julia Roberts, Rhys Ifans, Emma Chambers, Tim McInnerny, Gina McKee, and Hugh Bonneville. Roger Mitchell (director), Richard Curtis (screenplay), and Duncan Kenworthy (producer). A production by Polygram Filmed Entertainment, Working Title Films, Bookshop Productions, and Notting Hill Pictures. Released on DVD in 1999 (in Europe) by Universal Pictures UK. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 24 KATHERINE: Well, at least I know where it is now. 25 CHRISTIANUS: It's not that urgent, I hope? Can you manage? 26 KATHERINE: I'll try. 27 CHRISTIANUS: Good. So let's continue with our little inventory. 28 KATHERINE: All right. 29 CHRISTIANUS: So here's the smallest room. 30 KATHERINE: It's cosy. But all tables are taken. 3 CHRISTIANUS: Unfortunately, yes. But look around! What do you see? 32 KATHERINE: Ah! Nice wallpaper! 33 CHRISTIANUS: Well, maybe on this wall. 34 KATHERINE: French design? 35 CHRISTIANUS: British, I think. But not from this era, obviously. And? 21 111:13, your sweater looks clean: In Notting Hill (1999; ref. supra, note 'Notting Hill-blue door' at 111:9), it is the orange juice that William spills over Anna Scott that becomes the 'entry ticket' to William's world behind the blue door. 111:27, inventory: As we shall see, it is not without reason that Christianus is using the word 'inventory' here. He might have used the word 'sightseeing' (or 'safari') instead, but that might not have been as fitting as 'inventory', if the aim was to 'count' and 'evaluate' not only the available chairs and tables, but also the artworks. 111:32, wallpaper: One may note that the word 'wallpaper' is not entirely insignificant in the history of impressionism. Shapiro mentions that, both when it comes to pictures and wallpaper, the ground coat is called 'impression' (Shapiro 1997, p. 21). Also worth mentioning because of its potential relevance is that Leroy the critic once used the word Backstage Drama 36 KATHERINE: And . . . a Renoir!? 37 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. The impressionist. 38 KATHERINE: Just my style! 39 CHRISTIANUS: I thought so. 40 KATHERINE: Is it the original? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Does it look like the original? 'wallpaper' when criticising one of Monet's works (Shapiro 1997, p. 21). MEYER SCHAPIRO (1997), Impressionism: Reflections and Perceptions. New York: George Braziller. 111:35, this era: Even assuming that the word 'era' is to be understood not as '[t]he initial point assumed in a system of chronology' (Simpson and Weiner 1989a, p. 362) or as '[a] date, or an event, which forms the commencement of a new period' (Simpson and Weiner 1989a, p. 362), but more along the lines of '[a] historical period; a portion of historical time marked by the continuance throughout it of particular influences, social conditions, etc.' (Simpson and Weiner 1989a, p. 362), one would still need to determine the type and extent of that historical period: whether it might coincide with, for example, a certain century, decennium, or other time period used by ordinary people; whether it might coincide with an 'academic' period that, for instance, scholars of general history, political history, economic history, or art history may have defined or documented in their publications; or, alternatively, whether the word 'era' only may be decisively deciphered by an intimate knowledge of Christianus's own proprietary system of historical analysis. Turning now to the word 'this', we may also ask the following question: What work does the word 'this' do in the phrase 'this era', and what can we conclude from it? Here are two scenarios. One scenario is that the phrase 'this era' might be meant to refer to the era of the year in which Christianus utters that phrase; and since the scene is set in 2007, 'this era' would point to 'the era of 2007'. If we now take 'era' to mean 'millennium', 'century', or even 'decennium', then Christianus would, in effect, just be saying that the wallpaper is not from the twenty-first century; but if we take 'era' to mean, for example, 'the post9/11 era', the wallpaper might very well be from 2001. However, in both of these cases, the word 'obviously' may signal the idea that the wallpaper really is from the Victorian or near-Victorian era, or at least, not from the twenty-first century. Another scenario is that - since Christianus is at The Late Victorian at the time of this speech - the phrase 'this era' might be meant to refer to the era of the year, or period, that the interior design of The Late Victorian is trying to reproduce, replicate, or emulate. 22 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 42 KATHERINE: No. 43 CHRISTIANUS: There you go. 44 KATHERINE: But it's still very, very nice. 45 CHRISTIANUS: It's not that bad. 46 KATHERINE: Well, I just love it! Even though it's very famous. 47 CHRISTIANUS: You don't find it cheesy? I mean, 23 If we now take 'era' to mean 'century' or 'decennium', then Christianus would, in effect, be saying either that the wallpaper is not from the nineteenth century, or not from one of the (late) decades of the nineteenth century; but if we take 'era' to mean, for example, one of the 'academic' periods of the late Victorian era (cf., for example, Harrison 1990, who puts it between 1875 and 1901), Christianus might be saying that the wallpaper either was made in 1874 or earlier, or in 1902 or later. Thus it seems fair to say that the word 'obviously' here plays a different role than in the first scenario: for in the second scenario it seems to indicate that there is some aspect of the wallpaper design that is not in 'stylistic harmony' with all the other style-creating environmental elements of the café. J. F. C. HARRISON (1990), Late Victorian Britain, 1875–1901. Oxford: Fontana Press. J. A. SIMPSON AND E. S. C. WEINER, EDS. (1989a), The Oxford English Dictionary, vol. v (Dvandva–Follis). Second edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 111:37, The impressionist: Christianus's statement can be understood in a variety of ways. Since Katherine is interested in art history, that comment does not seem to serve as an 'educational' comment, at least not in regard to information pertaining to Pierre-Auguste Renoir himself. But this phrase might serve to distinguish Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841–1919) from his son, since Jean Renoir (1894–1979) was not a famous impressionist painter, but, among other things, an 'author and producer of plays and films' (Renoir 1962, p. 171). Alternatively, this phrase may serve the purpose of presenting a general stylistic term ('impressionist'), not with the aim of clarifying which Renoir it is, but with the aim of making Katherine reveal whether or not she is into all impressionist painters, or just some small subset. JEAN RENOIR (1962), Renoir, My Father. Translated by Randolph and Dorothy Weaver. London: Collins. 111:38, Just my style! This statement of Katherine's seems to be in harmony with her taste for at least one other impressionist artist, as noted at 1:42–48 in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, pp. 6–7; ref. supra, note 'you're late' at 1:1). It is unclear, however, what attracts her the most - is Backstage Drama Au Moulin de la Galette? 48 KATHERINE: Cheesy? The original? Or the reproduction? 49 CHRISTIANUS: Are they any different? 50 KATHERINE: I thought you were a philosopher? 24 it the colours, the style, or the motif? Or is it some combination of them? 111:47, Au Moulin de la Galette: This painting (oil on canvas, 131 x 175 cm; reproduced in colour in Broude 1990, p. 11; Courthion 1989, pp. 112–113; Schapiro 1997, p. 76; ref. supra, note 'wallpaper' at 111:32) goes under several names: Le bal au Moulin de la Galette, Le bal de Moulin de la Galette, or simply Moulin de la Galette. It was one of the 'two major works' painted in 1876 by Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841–1919), the other being Anna (Elgar 1966, col. 163). It was allegedly intended as 'a historical painting' (Musée d'Orsay 2002, p. 6), showing (some version of ) a busy, contemporary open-air dance scene in the artist's own (working-class) neighbourhood of Montmartre, seemingly without any cats (cf. Rubin 2003, pp. 111–125), but at least with many other animated beings, many of which include the artist's own friends and models: Estelle, Lamy, Norbert Goeneutte, and Georges Rivière are found in the foreground; Gervex, Cordey, Lestringuez, Lhote, Solares y Cardenas, and Margot are on the dance floor (Courthion 1989, p. 112) - is, according to Distel, 'without doubt the most perfect example of Renoir's Impressionism' (Distel 1996, p. 208). But it was a relatively rough road to recognition for Renoir. Only after a series of 'cheap' sales in the first half of the 1870s, both at the public auctions at the Hôtel Drouot (cf. Bodelsen 1968) and at the first two 'independent' (Rubin 2005, p. 1109) Impressionist Exhibitions, did Renoir eventually decide to participate with this painting in the Third Impressionist Exhibition in 1877 - at a time when (at least some of ) the participating painters now had accepted the label 'impressionist', and also were actively promoting it (Broude 1990, p. 12). This was in face of the silence after his submission of seven canvases (Dancer, The Opera Box or The Theatre Box, Parisian Woman, and others; Distel 1996, p. 207; Elgar 1966, col. 163) to the First Impressionist Exhibition in 1874 at the old studio of Félix Nadar (Gaspard-Félix Tournachon), 'the greatest portrait photographer of the nineteenth century' (McPherson 2001, p. 7); and, most importantly, after a major setback in conjunction with his submission of fifteen works to the Second Impressionist Exhibition in 1876 at the Durand-Ruel Gallery when Albert Wolff of Le Figaro criticized his Study (Nude in the Sunlight) as simply being a 'heap of decomposing flesh' (Distel 1996, p. 208). Nowadays, however, Renoir's paintings are extremely well regarded, and are sold at top prices at quality auction houses. One example of this is the Au Moulin de la Galette, which in 1990 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 5 CHRISTIANUS: What do you mean? Shouldn't philosophers ask questions? 52 KATHERINE: It's not that. 53 CHRISTIANUS: What is it, then? 54 KATHERINE: Well, you seem to say that the 25 was sold for a respectable $72,000,000 at an auction at Sotheby's in New York (Wood 1997, p. 216), after their auction catalogue initially had estimated it at '$40,000,000–50,000,000' (Sotheby's 1990). And that was only the smaller version of this painting (78 x 114 cm; nicely reproduced in Sotheby's 1990) - the full-scale version is still (in 2012), since 1986, hanging at the Musée d'Orsay in Paris (Musée d'Orsay 2012). MERETE BODELSEN (1968), 'Early Impressionist Sales 1874–94 in the Light of Some Unpublished \"Procès-Verbaux\"' in The Burlington Magazine, vol. 111, no. 783, pp. 330–349. NORMA BROUDE (1990), 'A World in Light: France and the International Impressionist Movement, 1860–1920' in Norma Broude, ed., World Impressionism: The International Movement, 1860– 1920. New York: Harry N. Abrams, pp. 8–35. PIERRE COURTHION (1989), Impressionism. Translated from the French by John Shepley. New York: Galahad Books. ANNE DISTEL (1996), 'Renoir, (Pierre-) Auguste' in Jane Turner, ed., The Dictionary of Art, vol. 26 (Raphon–Rome, ancient, §II: Architecture). New York: Grove, pp. 207–210. FRANK ELGAR (1966), 'Renoir, Pierre Auguste' in Massimo Pallottino, ed., Encyclopedia of World Art, vol. 12 (Renaissance–Shahn). New York, Toronto, and London: McGraw-Hill and Venezia e Roma: Istituto per la Collaborazione Culturale, cols. 162–167. HEATHER MCPHERSON (2001), The Modern Portrait in Nineteenth-Century France. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. MUSÉE D'ORSAY (2002), In the Times of the Impressionist Exhibitions (1874– 1886). Paris: Musée d'Orsay. Visitor's Sheet in PDF format retrieved from the Musée d'Orsay website [http://www. musee-orsay.fr] on Tuesday, 16 November 2010. MUSÉE D'ORSAY (2012), Auguste Renoir: Bal du moulin de la Galette (Notice de l'oeuvre). Paris: Musée d'Orsay. Online article retrieved from the Musée d'Orsay website [http://www.musee-orsay.fr] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. JAMES H. RUBIN (2003), Impressionist Cats and Dogs: Pets in the Painting of Modern Life. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press. JAMES H. RUBIN (2005), 'Impressionism' in Maryanne Cline Horowitz, ed., New Dictionary of the History of Ideas, vol. 3 (Game Theory–Lysenkoism). New York: Thomson Gale, pp. 1109–1111. SOTHEBY'S (1990), Pierre-Auguste Renoir: Au Moulin de la Galette. From the Collection of Mr. and Mrs. John Hay Whitney. Auction: Thursday, May 17, 1990 at approximately 8:00 pm. Production coordinator: Nina Marin Backstage Drama original and the reproduction are nondifferent. 55 CHRISTIANUS: Aren't philosophers allowed to say that? 56 KATHERINE: Of course they are. But aren't you a friend of Plato's? 57 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. In an Aristotelian sort of way. 58 KATHERINE: And didn't Plato say something about originals and reproductions in art? 59 CHRISTIANUS: He certainly did. 60 KATHERINE: And that is not interesting to you? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Of course it is. But what I can recall, he didn't mention anything about cheesiness. 62 KATHERINE: But you don't seem to be very in26 Moore; photographer: Louis Romano; cover design: Barbara Olejniczak; consultant art director: Alan Hartwell; color separations: Toppan Printing. New York: Sotheby's. CHRISTOPHER WOOD (1997), The Great Art Boom 1970–1997. Edited by Duncan Hislop and Sharron Clarke. Surrey: Art Sales Index. 111:57, Aristotelian . . . way: Although Christianus very well may be acquainted with Aristotle's ideas of friendship, it is unlikely that Katherine would have any deeper insight into such matters. In any case, a passage in Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics says: 'Still perhaps it would appear desirable, and indeed it would seem to be obligatory, especially for a philosopher, to sacrifice even one's closest personal ties in defence of the truth' [Gr. doxeie d' an isôs beltion einai, kai dein epi sôtêriai ge tês alêtheias kai ta oikeia anairein, allôs te kai philosophous ontas] (1096a14–16; Aristotle 1982, pp. 16–17). But also cf. a passage in Plato's Republic: 'Yet all the same we must not honour a man above truth' [Gr. all' ou gar pro ge tês alêtheias timêteos anêr] (595c2–3; Plato 1946, pp. 420–421) - a passage that both Camerarius and Cousin think is the origin of the famous Wendy's Risky Role-Play terested in talking about any cheesiness, either. 63 CHRISTIANUS: It's just that it reminds me of food. And I am hungry! And I desperately need some coffee. 64 KATHERINE: Me too. But I just want to know this. Are you saying that it's just as cheesy to own the original painting as it is to own this reproduction? Or any reproduction? 65 CHRISTIANUS: It's much worse than that. 66 KATHERINE: Much worse? 67 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But that is a long story, just like the one about Owen. So before we get into that, let's check the next room first. 68 KATHERINE: OK. Aristotelian passage above (Cazac 1889, p. 11). For a nice overview of Aristotle's ideas on friendship, see Guthrie (1981, pp. 384–390); and for more general introductions on the topic of friendship, including also what other philosophers in the history of philosophy have thought about it, see, for example, Badhwar (1998) and Sherman (2005). ARISTOTLE (1982), The Nicomachean Ethics. With an English Translation by H. Rackham. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press and London: William Heinemann. NEERA K. BADHWAR (1998), 'Friendship' in Edward Craig, ed., Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 794–797. HENRY-PIERRE CAZAC (1889), Polémique d'Aristote contre la théorie platonicienne des idées. Tarbes: Émile Croharé. W. K. C. GUTHRIE (1981), A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. v1: Aristotle: An Encounter. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. PLATO (1946), The Republic, vol. 11 (Books v1–x). With an English Translation by Paul Shorey. London: William Heinemann and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. NANCY SHERMAN (2005), 'Friend27Backstage Drama 69 CHRISTIANUS: This way. 70 KATHERINE: I'm right behind. 7 CHRISTIANUS: So what do you think? 72 KATHERINE: Oh, a yellow room! And all these photographs! And things! How charming! 73 CHRISTIANUS: I guess . . . 28 ship' in Donald M. Borchert, ed., Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vol. 3 (Determinables–Fuzzy logic). Second edition. Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson Gale, pp. 748–751. 111:72, all these photographs: Though the distance between the poor and the rich continued to grow in the late Victorian era (Harwood 2009, p. 20; ref. supra, note 'it's quite popular' at 1:34) - as we perhaps can symbolize by the increasing concern for that 'large element of slum dwellers who lived in a state of near-starvation' (Wood 1982, p. 284; ref. supra, note 'it's quite popular' at 1:34) - there was a relatively prosperous middle class on the rise. And that middle class seems to have been very fond of the idea of a 'Home Sweet Home' (Harwood 2009, pp. 22–23). This interest for the home as a meeting place and 'life-world' sometimes manifested itself in the form of heavily ornamented rooms and spaces, not only packed with photographs but also with other things. According to Roger Hart, some distinguishing features of such Victorian living rooms were: '[t]he curtains and wallpaper would be heavily patterned; gilt and silver framed watercolours, cameos, and later in the century, photographs would be hung on the walls, and placed on flat surfaces such as tables, dressers and pianos (which were themselves covered in lace cloths)' (Hart 1971, p. 88). So if The Late Victorian coffee house is designed to emulate some such popular Victorian style, it could very well be that Katherine and Christianus here are experiencing (some aspects of ) an interior milieu like the one in, for example, the 1895 photograph of a late Victorian sitting room (Hart 1971, p. 88); or, perhaps, something like the one seen in the photographs by Frank Connor of the sitting room scene in David Lynch's film The Elephant Man (1980), in which John Merrick is having tea with Dr. Frederick Treves and his wife Anne (Kuhn and Connor 1980, pp. 58–60) - a scene that may have been inspired by the 'real' John Merrick's (1860–1890) visit to Treves's 'small house' in Wimpole Street (Treves 1980, p. 23; Howell and Ford 1992, p. 114). ROGER HART (1971), English Life in the Nineteenth Century. Hove: Wayland. MICHAEL HOWELL AND PETER FORD (1992), The True History of the Elephant Man. New [third] edition, Extensively Revised with Much Fresh Information. London: Penguin Books. JOY KUHN AND FRANK CONNOR (1980), The Elephant Man: The Book of the Film. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 74 KATHERINE: But no tables. 75 CHRISTIANUS: No. But at least there's a decent piece of art. Over there! 76 KATHERINE: Aaah! Wonderful! 77 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, it's quite good. 78 KATHERINE: Watercolour? 29 With a section on Mel Brooks by Maxim Jakubowski. Book designer: Martyn Atkins; co-ordinator: David Martin. London: Virgin Books. THE ELEPHANT MAN (1980), starring Anthony Hopkins, John Hurt, John Gielgud, Freddie Jones, Wendy Hiller, Anne Bancroft, and Hannah Gordon. David Lynch (director, screenplay), Christopher De Vore (screenplay), Eric Bergren (screenplay), Frederick Treves (book: Treves 1980), Ashley Montagu (book: The Elephant Man: A Study in Human Dignity), Stuart Cornfeld (executive producer), and Jonathan Sanger (producer). A Brooksfilms production. Released on DVD in 2001 (in Europe) by Momentum Pictures. FREDERICK TREVES (1980), The Elephant Man and other Reminiscences. London: A Star Book published by the Paperback Division of W. H. Allen & Co. 111:75, decent . . . art: There is a possibility that a vegetarian or pacifist-inclined art critic might object here and say that there is nothing 'decent' about that painting, since it seems to depict a hunting party looking for animals to kill. One (quick) way to respond would be to suggest that Christianus might not here be referring so much to the contents of the painting as he is to the manner in which it has been painted. But even if that is Christianus's 'stance', it is not entirely unlikely that there is more to the story. So another way to respond would be to say that Christianus indeed is referring to the story in that painting, and comparing it to the story in the Renoir; and in doing so, he is finding the French one less decent. However, Christianus's own preference for a vegetarian lifestyle certainly complicates the issue: for how can he find this scene more decent than the French one, where there is (seemingly) no killing going on, or planned? One possibility is that it is the portrayed 'seriousness' and the 'sobriety' of the hunting scene that makes it more 'decent', even though the scene also contains some characters that Christianus himself would not mingle with. Maybe Christianus finds the French scene 'too gay' in the sense that it is too much focused on immediate bodily enjoyment and gaiety and too little on spiritual things and (perhaps) on the idea of 'duty'. If that reading of Christianus's comment has some merit, it is probably a good idea not to understand it as an expression of some simple Victorian propriety, even though Christianus very well may agree that, for example, the open-air consumption of alcohol, or at Backstage Drama 79 CHRISTIANUS: Definitely. And pencil. 80 KATHERINE: I just love the elephants! Are they Indian? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Or from Nepaul. Like the turban-equipped mahouts. 82 KATHERINE: Mahouts? 83 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. They steer the elephants. 84 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. Drivers. 85 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 86 KATHERINE: And the men in those white-greyish casks? 30 least of hard liquor, would be a bad idea for anyone seriously committed to a satisfactionist way of life. 111:81, Nepaul: Many Asian geographical names from the time of the nineteenth century, mentioned in publications such as the ILN, are hard to find on modern maps. Even so, it is not an impossible task for a modern person to deduce - even without any historical maps at hand - that the word 'Nepal' might be a possible stand-in for 'Nepaul'. And it is this 'deductive ease' by which one might move from 'Nepaul' to 'Nepal' that Christianus here presumably is counting on. So even if Katherine doesn't know, for instance, that Nepal, unlike India, was not ruled by the British at the time of the 'elephant painting', Christianus still probably thinks that Katherine, in all likelihood, will be able to morph that old proper name into its modern variant. 111:81, mahouts: According to Simpson and Weiner, the word 'mahout' - also spelled 'mahote', 'mahoot', 'mohaut', 'mahouhut', and 'mohout' - is derived from the Hindi word mahaaut, mahaawat (mahâvat), and means 'An elephant-driver' (Simpson and Weiner 1989b, p. 206). Chaturvedi and Tiwari, for example, define mahâvat as 'a mahaut, elephant-driver', and lists it as 'nm' (Chaturvedi and Tiwari 1981, p. 586), indicating that it - unless it is one of the 'large number of words' which are victims of some 'incredible' gender 'anarchy', in which case its listing is that of the usage 'in the western Hindi region' (Chaturvedi and Tiwari 1981, p. xiv) - is used as a masculine noun. McGregor also lists mahâvat as a masculine noun meaning 'a mahout, elephant-driver', but also traces it back to 'mahâmâtra-', allegedly an OIA (Old Indo-Aryan) source word/construct (McGregor 1993, p. 800). Wendy's Risky Role-Play 87 CHRISTIANUS: They are the European visitors. 88 KATHERINE: No women? 89 CHRISTIANUS: Apparently not. Unless they are unusually flat-chested and wear bogus beards or mock moustaches. 90 KATHERINE: Hmmm. And what's that black thing there, in front of all the elephants? A dog, or something? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 92 KATHERINE: European too? 93 CHRISTIANUS: No no. It's a wild one. 31 MAHENDRA CHATURVEDI AND B. N. TIWARI, EDS. (1981), A Practical Hindi-English Dictionary. Second edition. New Delhi: National Publishing House. R. S. MCGREGOR, ED. (1993), The Oxford Hindi-English Dictionary. Oxford and Delhi: Oxford University Press. J. A. SIMPSON AND E. S. C. WEINER, EDS. (1989b), The Oxford English Dictionary, vol. 1x (Look–Mouke). Second Edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 111:88, No women? Although no women are portrayed in that scene, some women in India, at least nowadays, are very much into elephants: Mark Shand has, for example, produced an interesting travel documentary about Parbati Barua, the 'Queen of the Elephants' (Shand 1995). As for women in India in the late Victorian era, one may note the 1876 article called 'The Women of India' published in the Illustrated London News, which covered some of the daily routines of Indian women, including their dealings with animals such as cows and buffaloes (ILN 1876a, p. 302; ref. supra, note 'late Victorian classical music' at 1:42); and on the immediately preceding pages, in a set of pictures labelled 'Costumes of Western India', a handful of portraits depict how some of the Indian women were dressed at that time (ILN 1876a, pp. 300–301). MARK SHAND (1995), Queen of the Elephants. London: BCA, by arrangement with Jonathan Cape. 111:93, a wild one: From this statement we can be reasonably sure that the painting in question has some kind of connexion with the 'two-pager' scene published in the special attachment to the ILN named 'Extra Supplement to the Illustrated London News, March 25, 1876' (ILN 1876a; ref. supra, note 'late Victorian classical music' at 1:42). There is no other illustration in the ILN during Backstage Drama 94 KATHERINE: Wild? 95 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. All black dogs in Nepal are wild. Didn't you knooouuuw? 96 KATHERINE: Nooouuu, I didn't. So, who made it? 32 Wendy's Risky Role-Play the first half of 1876 where we can find white-casked men and mahouts on their elephants, with a black dog running in front, whether wild or not. The reason why 'the first half of 1876' is significant will be seen in a later footnote. 111:95, knooouuuw: Although it is very common that speakers emphasize certain words in different ways, a philosophically inclined person - especially one interested in 'practical' epistemology and the idea of distinguishing, for example, 'truth' from 'falsity', or a 'joke' from a 'serious statement' - might find it interesting to note that Christianus here modulates the very word that represents the idea of 'knowing'. 111:97, God . . . makes dogs: Cf. a passage in Plato's Republic, where, in a discussion about a 'natural' couch (as opposed to a couch made by a painter or a cabinet-maker), Plato writes that one would seem to think that it is one which 'God produces, or who else?' [Gr. theon ergasasthai. ê tin' allon;] (597b5–6; Plato 1946, pp. 426–427; ref. supra, note 'Aristotelian . . . way' at 111:57). 111:99, anonymous artist: As can be seen in those (two dozen or so) issues published in the first half of 1876, the editor(s) of the Illustrated London News had different ways to cope with captions. Some illustrations had a caption that only described the scene, without mentioning any artist, such as 'A Hindoo Mendicant Pilgrim' (ILN 1876d, p. 156) and 'The Queen Opening Parliament: Procession in the Peers' Corridor' (ILN 1876d, p. 161). Other illustrations had a caption that both described the scene and mentioned the name of the original artist: 'The Railway Accident at Abbotts Ripton, Near Huntingdon: Working Parties Removing the Injured; From a Sketch by Mr. Gompertz, a Passenger' (ILN 1876c, p. 97) and 'Life on the Crozet Islands; From Sketches Supplied by Mr. Spencer Josten' (ILN 1876f, p. 389). Many other illustrations, however, were accompanied by a caption that did not mention the artist by name, but still acknowledged him indirectly: 'Inundations at Rome: The Ghetto Submerged; From a Sketch by Our Special Artist' (ILN 1876b, p. 8) and 'Tame Elephants Hunting a Wild Elephant; From a Sketch by One of Our Special Artists in India' (ILN 1876e, p. 329). ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876b), Saturday, 1 January 1876, vol. 68, no. 1901. ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876c), Saturday, 29 January 1876, vol. 68, no. 1905. ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876d), Saturday, 12 February 1876, vol. 68, no. 1907. ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876e), Saturday, 1 April 1876, vol. 68, no. 1914. 97 CHRISTIANUS: God, I guess. Who else makes dogs? 98 KATHERINE: No, the paaainting, stupid! 99 CHRISTIANUS: Aaaaahh! The paaainting! Some anonymous artist, hired by the Illustrated ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876f ), Saturday, 22 April 1876, vol. 68, no. 1917. 111:99, Illustrated London News: Described by some as 'that bland old grey thing' (Waller 2006, p. 144) and by others as 'the world's most venerable pictorial news magazine' (Robinson 1976, p. 1134; ref. supra, note 'moustaches' at 11:20) and 'probably the most important single pictorial source for the social history of any age or country' (Bryant 1995), the Illustrated London News started its road to fame and glory already on Whit Saturday, 14 May 1842. Herbert Ingram and Nathaniel Cooke ran the operation from their office in Crane Court, close to 10 Fleet Street, where Palmer and Clayton had their 'steamy' printing machine (Smith 1995, p. 9). Its first sixteen-page issue was filled not only with thirty engravings (depicting Queen Victoria's Magnificent Fancy Dress Ball at Buckingham Palace, the Conflagration of the City of Hamburgh, etc.) as their widely distributed ILN prospectus already had advertised would be their weekly minimum quota, but also covered other interesting news: a Parliamentary Report, the Royal Academy Exhibition, Paris Fashions, etc. (Smith 1995, p. 9). While the sale of the first issue of the Illustrated London News 'only' amounted to 26,000 copies, the demand seems to have been greater; and already by the end of December that year, after almost having doubled the number of engravings, the sales reached 66,000 (Smith 1995, p. 10). By 1863 at least 300,000 copies were sold each week - an amazing number, considering that the Times (in 1861) sold no more than 70,000 (Hibbert 1977, p. 14) or '60,000 or more daily through the sixties and into the early seventies' (Best 1979, p. 248), the Daily News just 6,000, and the Morning Post a bleak 4,500 (Hibbert 1977, p. 14). GEOFFREY BEST (1979), Mid-Victorian Britain 1851–75. London: Fontana. ARTHUR BRYANT (1995), 'Foreword' in Leonard de Vries and Ursula Robertshaw, eds., History as Hot News 1842–1865: The World of the Early Victorians As Seen Through the Eyes of The Illustrated London News. London: John Murray, p. 5. CHRISTOPHER HIBBERT (1977), The Illustrated London News: Social History of Victorian Britain. London: Angus & Robertson. W. H. SMITH (1995), 'The Early Days of \"The Illustrated London News\"' in Leonard de Vries and Ursula Robertshaw, eds., History as Hot News 1842– 1865: The World of the Early Victorians As Seen Through the Eyes of The Illustrated London News. London: John Murray, pp. 9–12. PHILIP WALLER (2006), Writers, Read33Backstage Drama London News. 00 KATHERINE: Anonymous? 0 CHRISTIANUS: Well, at least to many of the casual readers of the ILN. But not to 34 Wendy's Risky Role-Play ers, and Reputations: Literary Life in Britain 1870–1918. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 111:101, casual readers . . . ILN: The idea here seems to be that this artist might remain anonymous to casual readers of the Illustrated London News, since such readers may simply look at the illustrations and perhaps quickly read the short captions (where this particular artist's name would not be mentioned; but cf. supra, note 'anonymous artist' at 111:99), but not attentively read (all of, much of, or any of ) the considerably longer body copy (where the artist's name sometimes were to be found). In the case of the particular illustration under scrutiny (see supra, note 'a wild one' at 111:93), the original artist's name was mentioned in the body copy (ILN 1876a, pp. 305–306; ref. supra, note 'late Victorian classical music' at 1:42), and also accompanied by his own description of this scene (ILN 1876a, p. 306) and other events (ILN 1876a, p. 307). Therefore, he would not have been anonymous to a non-casual reader. 111:101, ILN . . . editors: Who among the contemporary ILN editors would have been able to identify the artist who provided the original artwork to that previously mentioned 'two-pager' illustration in the Illustrated London News (cf. supra, note 'a wild one' at 111:93)? This is not an easy question. But perhaps we can say this. If we may think of George C. Leighton as the 'general' editor, in virtue of his role as a 'Printer and Publisher' after Herbert Ingram passed away in 1860 (Smith 1995, p. 12; ref. supra, note 'Illustrated London News' at 111:99) and onwards, then it seems fairly certain that he would have been able to say who this artist was, if not for any other reason than that this artist's name appeared in the body copy of that issue, together with a story (which one might presume that Leighton would have read and understood) describing the scene of his original sketch. A similar, perhaps even stronger, argument could be made in regard to John Lash Latey, the (copy) Editor who took over after the previous editors F. W. N. Bayley (until 1846), John Timbs (until 1852), and Charles Mackay (until 1859) had left the scene (Smith 1995, p. 10). John Lash Latey (1808–1891), one of 'several editors who never became well known' (Maidment 2009, p. 303) - and not to be confused with his son John Latey (1842–1902), editor of the Penny Illustrated Paper (Plarr 1899, p. 623) - would continue editing the ILN after Ingram's death until 1890 (Lee 1912, p. 412), and presumably was somewhat more actively involved in the integration of this artist's texts (mostly describing the scenes of his own artwork) into the body copy, blending them with other snippets of text. As for the Art Editor, Mason Jacksome of its editors, of course. 02 KATHERINE: Do you know who he was, or is? 03 CHRISTIANUS: Certainly. A freemason. 04 KATHERINE: A freemason? 35Backstage Drama son, we can be almost cent per cent sure that he knew who the original artist of this illustration was; for the artist himself mentions 'Mr. Jackson' several times in his Autobiography in situations where his ILN assignments were discussed, and where Jackson seems to have been one of his main contacts, if not the main one. BRIAN MAIDMENT (2009), 'Illustrated London News (1842–1989)' in Laurel Brake and Marysa Demoor, eds., Dictionary of Nineteenth-Century Journalism. Gent: Academia Press, pp. 301–303. VICTOR G. PLARR (1899), Men and Women of the Time. Fifteenth edition, revised and brought down to the present time. London: George Routledge and Sons. SIDNEY LEE (1912), Dictionary of National Biography. Second supplement, vol. 2 (Faed–Mybridge). London: Smith, Elder & Co. 111:103, freemason: Based on the preliminary information hitherto presented by Christianus, one might here deduce - after some historical research - that the freemason in question is William Simpson, an 'almost entirely self-taught' artist 'with an appetite for work' (Theroux 1987, p. 2). That he was an 'ardent member' of a freemason lodge is mentioned by George Eyre-Todd, the editor of Simpson's Autobiography, in the preface to that book (Simpson 1903, p. x). It is also practically demonstrated by Simpson's own publishing efforts for the Quatuor Coronati Lodge, no. 2076, in London (Simpson 1890). And if EyreTodd's account and Simpson's own publishing example would not constitute enough evidence, then one might simply go to the beginning of that very same AQC issue and inspect the record from their (then) last meeting. It will then be obvious that Simpson was not just some sort of 'passive outsider' that submitted freemason-friendly articles to that journal, but, on the contrary, was present, in an active role, at their meetings, as, for instance, on Friday, 20 December 1889, at 6 p.m., when he joined Pratt, Lewis, and some other committee members for a meeting at 12, Kensington Gardens Square, W., and where it also was announced that 'the Lodge' had accepted five new 'brethren' during 'Bro. Simpson's year of office' (AQC, vol. 3, part 1, p. 3). However, we do not know for certain whether or not Christianus himself had access to all of the above sources. But being a serious student of people, and perhaps also having read the research done by Stephen Knight (1985; 'impressively researched', The Observer) and Martin Short (1990; 'it is doubtful if a more conclusive book could have been written', Times Literary Supplement), Christianus might rather easily have applied a principle such as 'the rather typical freemason search for societal honour, prestige and power' to identify freemason-sounding passages in Simpson's 05 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. Who else would get a Monday opportunity like that? Hanging out with royalty? 06 KATHERINE: Royalty? 36 Autobiography, without ever having read Eyre-Todd's preface or the AQC. Christianus may therefore have found such freemason tendencies in the passage where Simpson says to Haghe - in an attempt to try to make their 'new' society [Institute of Painters in Water-Colours] more honourable than the 'old' society [Royal Society of Painters in Water-Colours] - that the Crown Princess of Germany was 'a possible empress in the future, and if we could secure her as an honorary member, we should be a long way ahead of the old Society' (Simpson 1903, p. 289). Alternatively, Christianus could have identified some similar tendencies in the passage where Simpson laments over a work on India which the financially troubled Day & Son could not publish, whereupon Simpson says, in no uncertain terms, 'I lost the honour and reputation which would have been due to me if such a work had been properly produced and published' (Simpson 1903, p. 78). Still another possibility would be that Christianus deduced that freemason character from Simpson's 1896 work by observing its overall design and focus on religious symbolism, in combination with some well-chosen passages such as 'The Masonic craftsman may here be asked to recall the ritual of installing the new W.M.' (Simpson 1896, p. 204) as well as 'The Dervishes are said to have initiatory rites, secret words and signs like the Freemasons. If this is so, the matter deserves more careful investigation than it has yet received' (Simpson 1896, pp. 136–137). STEPHEN KNIGHT (1985), The Brotherhood: The Secret World of the Freemasons. London: Grafton. MARTIN SHORT (1990), Inside the Brotherhood: Further Secrets of the Freemasons. London: Grafton. WILLIAM SIMPSON (1890), 'The Mummers, or Guisers' in Ars Quatuor Coronatorum, Being the Transactions of the Lodge Quatuor Coronati, no. 2076, London, vol. 3, part 1, pp. 81–82. WILLIAM SIMPSON (1896), The Buddhist Praying-Wheel: A Collection of Material Bearing Upon the Symbolism of the Wheel and Circular Movements in Custom and Religious Ritual. London and New York: Macmillan. WILLIAM SIMPSON (1903), The Autobiography of William Simpson, R.I. (Crimean Simpson). Edited by George Eyre-Todd. Illustrated with Many Reproductions of Simpson's Pictures from the Collections of His Majesty the King, the Duke of Newcastle, the Marquis of Bute, the Earl of Rosebery, the Earl of Northbrook, the British Museum, South Kensington Museum, The Palestine Exploration Fund, etc. London: T. Fisher Unwin. PAUL THEROUX (1987), Mr. William Simpson of The Illustrated London News: Pioneer War Artist 1823–1899. Includes an essay by Simon Peers. London: The Fine Art Society. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 07 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. He's with the Prince of Wales and his imperialist hunting party. 08 KATHERINE: Well, just for the record: I am no great fan of either royalty or freemasonry. 111:105, Monday: Another indication that the previously mentioned illustration seems to depict the very same scene that Christianus has been talking about, is that he here says it took place on a Monday. This fits well with the description in the text that accompanied the ILN illustration, provided by the 'anonymous' artist himself, William Simpson, wherein he says it happened '[o]n [a] Monday' (ILN 1876a, p. 306; ref. supra, note 'late Victorian classical music' at 1:42). The problem, however, is that Simpson does not mention any specific date; and his ILN text is also not dated as a whole. So which Monday was it? Well, we know that his text was published in the ILN on Saturday, 25 March 1876. And we also know that his sketches could not be transmitted via any telegraph lines, neither via any land lines, nor via the (then) rather recently completed India ocean telegraph (Parkinson 1870). Furthermore, the transit times from England to India at that time, at least for the transportation of people (and possibly also for some packages containing sketches and manuscripts), were around a month or, perhaps, at best, three weeks ('I left London . . . on September 28, 1875, and arrived in Bombay on October 30th'; Simpson 1903, p. 270; ref. supra, note 'freemason' at 111:103). Therefore, it seems problematic to suggest that the event should have happened later than, say, the first week of March - and this is even without taking into account the time needed to produce the ILN articles, and especially the illustrations; for even as late as in the 1870s it still 'took at least another week for drawings of a scene to be transferred into an engraving' (Lake 1984, p. 153), once the sketches finally did arrive in London. Another important piece of information is that the depicted scene seemingly took place on Nepalese territory, as mentioned by Simpson (ILN 1876a, p. 306). And we also know that the time spent in that territory was limited: the Prince of Wales crossed the Sarda river into Nepal in time for dinner on Sunday, 20 February 1876, after first having waited to break up from his temporary camp at 'Bunbussa' (cf. modern 'Banbasa' in India's Uttarakhand) until 3 p.m. (Russell 1878, p. 428; also cf. Simpson's account in ILN 1876a, p. 307); and after having spent a few weeks there, laying down all those Terai tigers, he 'crossed back again . . . into British territory' (Wheeler 1876, p. 331) on Sunday, 5 March 1876, via the Sarda, which was as 'bright, clear, and blue as the Rhone at Geneva, but twice as broad' (Russell 1878, p. 451). Therefore, we have only two Mondays left to choose from: 21 February and 28 February. But the reports of the 28th seem to fit badly with a number of points that Simpson mentions, and in particular with the 'partitioning' of 37Backstage Drama They just don't interest me. 09 CHRISTIANUS: Right. But I think it's the wrong approach. 38 the day into two 'heats', with one tiger killed by the Prince in the first session, and six others by himself and others in the second. For I have found no reports in the non-Simpsonian accounts of any 'heats' on that day, at least not of the hunting variety. This might have something to do with that they, that day, also moved their camp to a new location at Mooza Panee (Russell 1878, p. 447) - a location that seemingly was 'further on into Nepaul, a distance of three miles' (Wheeler 1876, p. 330) - and therefore may have had little time for anything other than a single run. And even if they had two hunting 'heats' that day (i.e., without reporting it), the total number of tigers still doesn't add up. For Simpson mentions explicitly that, on the day of the painting, they shot 'seven in that one day' (ILN 1876a, p. 306). But on the 28 February they only 'shot four tigers' (Wheeler 1876, pp. 330–331), and only one of them on the account of the Prince of Wales (Russell 1878, p. 447). Also, that frightening and 'hard-to-forget-to-mention' event on the 28th, when a tiger jumped up on the Prince's elephant (Russell 1878, pp. 447–448), had not yet been explicitly reported in ILN issue no. 1913; it was only a week later, in issue no. 1914, that this event would be thoroughly covered in the ILN, both in the form of a story told by 'one of the gentlemen of his [the Prince's] party' (ILN 1876e, p. 330; ref. supra, note 'anonymous artist' at 111:99), as well as in the form of that impressive 'two-pager' illustration in the extra supplement at the end (ILN 1876e, after p. 336), which was based on Simpson's original sketch (Simpson 1903, facing p. 271). The Monday event that Christianus is mentioning seems therefore to have occurred on 21 February 1876. For all sources confirm that a total of seven tigers were killed that day (Russell 1878, p. 431; Wheeler 1876, p. 322); and they confirm that this was accomplished in two 'heats' - the first one starting '[a] little after eight' (Wheeler 1876, p. 321) and finishing 'just' before 12:30 (Russell 1878, p. 430), with the Prince killing one tiger, first firing 'both barrels' and wounding him, and then 'two more shots' to finish him off (Wheeler 1876, 322); the second one starting '[a]fter luncheon' (Wheeler 1876, p. 322). Furthermore, all writers, including Simpson (ILN 1876a, p. 306), especially mention that event which 'men see but once in a lifetime' (Wheeler 1876, p. 322) and which the 'afternoon's sport was inaugurated by' (Russell 1878, p. 431), namely that very impressive procession of at least 700 elephants (with '600 elephants belonging to Nepaul'; ILN 1876e, p. 330) forming a single line (Wheeler 1876, p. 321) in an apparent move to hinder any local tigers escaping - a move that seems to fit well with the information that Sir Jung Bahadur and his servants had worked diligently, for weeks, trying to entrap as many tigers as possible into a very small area, using 'large fires' Wendy's Risky Role-Play 0 KATHERINE: What is?  CHRISTIANUS: To say that it doesn't interest you. 2 KATHERINE: Why? 39 (Wheeler 1876, p. 321), presumably in an attempt to provide the best possible Nepalese hunting experience for his British guests. BRIAN LAKE (1984), British Newspapers: A History and Guide for Collectors. Introduction by John Frost. London: Sheppard Press. J. C. PARKINSON (1870), The Ocean Telegraph to India: A Narrative and a Diary. Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons. WILLIAM HOWARD RUSSELL (1878), The Prince of Wales' Tour: A Diary in India. With Some Account of the Visits of His Royal Highness to the Courts of Greece, Egypt, Spain, and Portugal. With Illustrations by Sydney P. Hall. New York: R. Worthington; and London: Rivers & Co. GEORGE WHEELER (1876), India in 1875–76: The Visit of the Prince Of Wales. A Chronicle of His Royal Highness's Journeyings in India, Ceylon, Spain, and Portugal. With Map and Diaries. London: Chapman and Hall. 111:105, opportunity: Although the scene occurred on a Monday, and thus may be thought of as a 'Monday opportunity', Christianus must have been aware that this was not just a quick, one-day opportunity, but only a small sample of the many days that Simpson accompanied the Prince of Wales on his India tour - an experience that Simpson himself describes as 'four months of Lord Mayor's Show' (Simpson 1903, p. 270; ref. supra, note 'freemason' at 111:103). But Simpson's memory of the Terai tiger-hunting experience was different - equipped with a private tent and his own elephant, it was 'the only pleasant time I had during the four months' (Simpson 1903, p. 270). 111:107, He's with the Prince: As can be seen both in the ILN illustration named 'The Prince of Wales TigerShooting with Sir Jung Bahadoor' (ILN 1876a, 'Extra Supplement' attached after p. 312; ref. supra, note 'late Victorian classical music' at 1:42) and in Simpson's beautiful watercolour, signed 'H.R.H. The Prince of Wales in the Terai with Sir Jung Bahadoor, in Feb. 1876' (Christie's 1996, p. 52), there were seven elephants in the foreground and many others in the background on that Monday; and those in the background were, according to Simpson himself, only 'a portion of the long line of elephants coming up in close line behind' (ILN 1876a, p. 306). The Prince of Wales is seen in the foreground, seated on the second elephant from the right, wearing a light brown coat and a white-greyish cask. In the back seat is, almost certainly, Mr. Peter Robertson, since W. H. Russell assures us that 'the Prince always takes Mr. Robertson behind him in the howdah' (ILN 1876a, p. 306). This fits well also with the 'tiger attack' scene a week later, on Monday, 28 March 1876, when the Prince's elephant was attacked by a tiger, and 'tore the cloth on which the howdah rested, coming very close to Backstage Drama 3 CHRISTIANUS: It's like saying, 'I am not interested in the plague'. 4 KATHERINE: What does that have to do with royals? Or freemasons? Peter Robertson' (Russell 1878, p. 448; ref. supra, note 'Monday' at 111:105), as seen both in the ILN illustration of that event (ILN 1876e, 'Extra Supplement' attached after p. 336) and in Simpson's own sketch (Simpson 1903, facing p. 271; ref. supra, note 'freemason' at 111:103). This confirms that Mr. Robertson's (usual) position (still) was that of sitting behind the Prince. CHRISTIE'S (1996), Visions of India, Including the Paul F. Walter Collection of Indian Photographs. London: Christie, Manson & Woods. 111:107, Prince of Wales: In the late Victorian era, Albert Edward was the Prince of Wales. He was born on 9 November 1841, was made Prince on 8 December 1841, and was baptized on 25 January 1842 (Hopkins 1910, pp. 31– 32). After Victoria's death on 22 January 1901 (Strachey 1931, p. 268), he was made king, and ruled England during the Edwardian era until 6 May 1910 (see frontispiece in Hopkins 1910). But it is also important to know, especially if one wants to understand Christianus's comments in regard to freemasons and royalty, that Prince Albert Edward was Freemasonry's 'main man' in England, in virtue of having been initiated as its Grand Master on 28 April 1875 at the Royal Albert Hall, where 'more than ten thousand members of the craft' were present (Hopkins 1910, p. 181; cf. Beresiner 2002, p. 6; Wheeler 1876, p. 376; ref. supra, note 'Monday' at 111:105). The idea that members of the royal family were freemasons was, at the time, nothing new: 'between 1737 and 1907, sixteen princes of the blood were freemasons, and four of them became kings' (Roberts 2008, p. 44); and between 1782 and 1843 the English Grand Mastership 'was held continuously by three members of the Royal family' (Roberts 2008, p. 41): 1782–1790 by the Duke of Cumberland, 1790–1813 by the Prince of Wales [later George IV], and 1813–1843 by the Duke of Sussex (Roberts 2008, p. 381; cf. Banvard 1875, p. 206). JOHN BANVARD (1875), The Private Life of a King. Embodying the Suppressed Memoirs of the Prince of Wales, Afterwards George IV, of England. With Corroborative Authorities, Drawn from the Secret Archives of the Chartists, and Authentic Documents in the British Museum. New York: The Literary and Art Publishing Company. YASHA BERESINER (2002), 'Brother Winston' in Masonic Quarterly Magazine, no. 3 (October), pp. 6–10. J. CASTELL HOPKINS (1910), The Life of King Edward VII, with a Sketch of the Career of George, Price of Wales and a History of the Royal Tour of the Empire in 1901. Toronto: W. E. Scull. J. M. ROBERTS (2008), The Mythology of the Secret Societies. London: Watkins Publishing. 40 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 5 CHRISTIANUS: That's the question. 6 KATHERINE: How do you mean? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Only when you have researched those topics extensively can you determine 41 LYTTON STRACHEY (1931), Queen Victoria. London: Chatto and Windus. 111:107, hunting party: Though many Europeans were part of Prince of Wales's hunting party in the Nepalese Terai, the most important member of that hunting team was Sir Jung Bahadur Rana (1816–1877), the 'virtual ruler' of Nepal (Wheeler 1876, p. 318; ref. supra, note 'Monday' at 111:105) - an iron-fist ruler whose time was 'preceded by a period of disgusting court intrigue and rank betrayals perpetrated by power-maniac nobles backed by foreign interest' and who not only 'shot dead his own maternal uncle, Premier Mathbar Singh Thapa' and plotted 'a massacre of almost all the defenceless nobles at a place in Kathmandu called \"Kot\"', but also 'relegated the king to the background and established a family rule' (Upadhyay 1971, p. 10). It was therefore not very surprising that it was Sir Jung Bahadur - rather than the more or less powerless Surendra Bikram Shah, King of Nepal - who 'ran the show' on the Nepalese side of the Sarda, making sure that the Prince and his associates had an excellent hunting experience. In the 'Monday' scene - as seen either in the ILN 'two-pager' (ILN 1876a, 'Extra Supplement' attached after p. 312; ref. supra, note 'late Victorian classical music' at 1:42) or in Simpson's own watercolour (Christie's 1996, p. 52; ref. supra, note 'He's with the Prince' at 111:107) - Sir Jung Bahadur is in the foreground, on the third elephant from the right, in white. Jung Bahadur (or Jang Bahadoor) is also depicted in several other places. One portrait displays his facial features well (ILN 1876a, p. 305), including his beard, whose hairs, Simpson tells us, 'are so wide apart that the outlines of the cheeks and chin can be seen distinctly through it' (ILN 1876a, p. 307). Another illustration depicts him - apparently a mile or so from Bunbussa (or Banbasa) at around 1 p.m. on Saturday, 19 February 1876 (ILN 1876a, p. 306) - greeting the horse-mounted Prince of Wales (ILN 1876a, p. 305). Other illustrations depict him standing in his howdah, as for example in 'The Critical Moment' (ILN 1876a, p. 308; reproduced [poorly] in Verney 1979, pp. 156–157) and in 'The Prince of Wales's Elephant Charged by a Tiger' (ILN 1876e, 'Extra Supplement' attached after p. 336; ref. supra, note 'anonymous artist' at 111:99). For a (seemingly rather late, possibly contemporary) photograph of Sir Jung Bahadur, seated, in full attire, see picture 338 in Christie's 1996 (p. 210). DEVENDRA RAJ UPADHYAY (1971), Nepal: An Interesting Account to Foreigners. Kathmandu: Department of Information, Ministry of Communication, HMG/Nepal. PETER VERNEY (1979), Animals in Peril. London: Mills & Boon and Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press. Backstage Drama whether or not they in any way resemble the plague. 8 KATHERINE: Why the plague? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Because it's deadly. 20 KATHERINE: So? 2 CHRISTIANUS: So even if you are not overly interested in the plague as a scholarly sub42 111:113, the plague: It seems relatively clear here that Christianus's objective is not to bring the discussion in such a direction as to talk about any specific plague, neither in a typological sense (e.g., bubonic plague, pneumonic plague, etc.) nor in a historical one (e.g., the Great Plague in London in 1665, the Ural plague in late Victorian times, etc.), but simply to use it as an example of a threat with potentially very severe consequences, not just for people in general but for Katherine in particular. However, even if this evaluation of Christianus's usage of the phrase 'the plague' is correct, it does not, of course, lead us to conclude that he is not capable of bringing up some interesting points about various aspects of plagues. One might very well imagine that he, in another place and time, might have put forward thrilling theories, facts and figures related to, for example, the 'protractedness' of the decline of the English population in the two centuries following the 1348–1349 Black Death (cf. Hatcher 1982, pp. 55–62); or might have chosen to talk about the potential dangers of antibiotics and pesticides and the prospect of emerging superbugs and superplagues (cf. Rewald 1998); or perhaps might have entered into a more literary-focused discussion on Albert Camus and Daniel Defoe and their pseudo-historical writings on plagues (Camus 1947; Defoe 1990). ALBERT CAMUS (1947), The Plague. Translated from the French by Stuart Gilbert. New York: The Modern Library. DANIEL DEFOE (1990), A Journal of the Plague Year; being Observations or Memorials of the most Remarkable Occurrences, as well Publick as Private, which happened in London during the last Great Visitation in 1665. Written by a Citizen who continued all the while in London. Edited by Louis Landa. With a new Introduction by David Roberts. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. JOHN HATCHER (1982), Plague, Population and the English Economy 1348– 1530. Studies in Economic and Social History. Edited for the Economic History Society by T. C. Smout. London and Basingstoke: The Macmillan Press. ENRIQUE REWALD (1998), Immune Crossover: The Two Faces of Immunity. An Approach to the Dangers of the Plague. New York and London: The Parthenon Publishing Group. Wendy's Risky Role-Play ject, it is still prudent, from a personal health perspective, to carefully observe exactly who has it. Then you may avoid that disease simply by not associating with them. 22 KATHERINE: So you are judging people? Is that what your crazy satisfactionism is all about? 43 111:117, resemble the plague: Although Christianus's point about research seems reasonable, it does not seem to be confined only to, as in this case, freemasons or royalty; it also seems necessary to engage in a thorough analysis of the plague, from different historical, sociological, epidemiological, and philosophical perspectives. So even though some of Christianus's previous speeches perhaps may have led Katherine to believe that she wouldn't have to engage in any plagueish scholarly studies, it is hard to see how she could avoid it, if she wasn't already fully conversant with it. For only then - after having discovered the 'standard' plague stories and their rats, fleas, and blood (cf. Cartwright 1977, p. 61; Winslow 1980, pp. 357–359), as well as some of their competing theories (cf. Lindemann 1999, pp. 42–48) - may she, perhaps, be in a better position to appreciate Christianus's comparative mood. FREDERICK F. CARTWRIGHT (1977), A Social History of Medicine. Themes in British Social History. Edited by J. Stevenson. London: Longman. MARY LINDEMANN (1999), Medicine and Society in Early Modern Europe. New Approaches to European History. Series editors: William Beik and T. C. W. Blanning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. CHARLES-EDWARD AMORY WINSLOW (1980), The Conquest of Epidemic Disease: A Chapter in the History of Ideas. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 111:121, avoid that disease: One should probably assume here that, whether or not he accepts such a theory himself, Christianus's explanation rests on some version of a 'germ theory of disease' - 'one germ, one disease' (Playfair 2007, p. 34) - since this is the dogma taught in the modern schools, and the dogma that Katherine most likely would subscribe to. For an overview of the development of different germ theories, see, for example, Gale (1970), Porter (1996, pp. 184–185) and Dwork (1981); and for an interesting observation on Kircher's alleged role in that development, see Winslow (1980, pp. 146–151; ref. supra, note 'resemble the plague' at 111:117). DEBORAH DWORK (1981), 'contagion' in W. F. Bynum, E. J. Browne, and Roy Porter, eds., Dictionary of the History of Science. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 75–77. Backstage Drama 23 CHRISTIANUS: No. But you have to understand - a satisfactionist is generally also somewhat of a chartist. 24 KATHERINE: But weren't the Chartists rather 44 E. F. GALE (1970), 'The Development of Microbiology' in Joseph Needham, ed., The Chemistry of Life: Eight Lectures on the History of Biochemistry. With an Introduction by Joseph Needham. Cambridge: At the University Press, pp. 38–59. JOHN PLAYFAIR (2007), Living with Germs In Health and Disease. New York: Oxford University Press. ROY PORTER (1996), 'Medical Science' in Roy Porter, ed., The Cambridge Illustrated History of Medicine. Project editor: Sarah Bunney; picture research: Sara Waterson; layout: Andrew Shoolbred; indexer: Barbara Hird; cartography: European Map Graphics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 154–201. 111:124, weren't the Chartists: Is it realistic that Katherine, an American lawyer, so immediately can answer Christianus in this way? Maybe we should think of this passage simply as an example of 'non-illusory' theatre, a (rather counterintuitive) term connected with 'implausibility' and 'infinite flexibility', where, for instance, one might 'leap from this earth to the clouds' (Styan 1975, p. 181)? Or is it, nevertheless, still possible that this is some sort of 'realistic', 'plausible', and 'illusory' theatre that we are dealing with here (Styan 1975, p. 180; cf. Boulton 1971, p. 162; Bowman and Ball 1961, p. 179)? Maybe Katherine did study nineteenth-century British (social, political, or legal) history in school? MARJORIE BOULTON (1971), The Anatomy of Drama. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. WALTER PARKER BOWMAN AND ROBERT HAMILTON BALL (1961), Theatre Language: A Dictionary of Terms in English of the Drama and Stage from Medieval to Modern Times. New York: Theatre Arts Books. J. L. STYAN (1975), Drama, Stage and Audience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 111:125, Victorian Chartists: The (early) Victorian Chartists have been portrayed in many ways. Some scholars have seen them as (very) violent: 'in many places Chartism took on the menacing aspect of a terrorist organisation' (Ward 1973, p. 120). But even though Royle also notes some violence, for instance at Norwich in 1841 (Royle 1981, p. 82), he still thinks that 'Chartism was . . . born out of the tradition of articulate, politically conscious artisan radicalism in London, with the encouragement of radicals among the higher classes. Though conscious of class, it was not a document conceived in hatred and conflict' (Royle 1981, p. 19). And Mather seemingly accepts that there was a class-struggle aspect to the Chartists, but still thinks that 'the first [aspect, the self-reliance of working men] was more pervasive' (Mather 1982, p. 35). And even if 'daily meetings and riots' in London had occurred (Brown and Daniels 1984, p. 125), how Wendy's Risky Role-Play judgmental? And violent? Like a plague? 25 CHRISTIANUS: Some of the Victorian Chartists may have been. But they don't look very violent on this old daguerreotype over 45 relevant and representative were these in regard to the picture that Katherine and Christianus are looking at? Or, put in another way: 'What evidence is there that O'Connor and the Chartists on that day in April had any intention of causing a revolution?' (Browne 1999, p. 97). Thus, there seems to be some scope for Christianus's 'not-so-very-violentlooking' comment. RICHARD BROWN AND CHRISTOPHER DANIELS (1984), The Chartists. Documents and Debates. General editor: John Wroughton. London and Basingstoke: Macmillan. HARRY BROWNE (1999), Chartism. London: Hodder & Stoughton. F. C. MATHER (1982), Chartism. General series no. 61. London: Historical Association. EDWARD ROYLE (1981), Chartism. Seminar Studies in History. Editor: Patrick Richardson. Harlow: Longman. J. T. WARD (1973), Chartism. London: B. T. Batsford. 111:125, old daguerreotype: A person well-read in the history of photography might here object and say that the usage of the modifier 'old' in front of the noun 'daguerreotype' does not do very much, since the overwhelming number of extant daguerreotypes are old; so why add a superfluous 'old'? One response to such an objection could be that Christianus here wants to be kind to Katherine. By adding the adjective 'old' Christianus also adds an 'excuse' for the otherwise so modernminded Katherine not to be intimidated or ashamed if she doesn't know that the old word 'daguerreotype' either might refer to the daguerreotype camera that Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre (1787– 1851) introduced in 1839, or to that metal-plate portrait that it produced (Harrison 1887, pp. 21–27; Tissandier 1877, pp. 53–63). Thus, it may be seen as a potential invitation to a discussion on early photography, where Christianus then, for example, might have presented his take on the quality of that very early picture that Daguerre's business partner Joseph Nicéphore Niepce (1765–1833) had produced with his heliography process already in 1822 or 1826 (Ohlman 1990, pp. 731–733); or raised some points in regard to that 'negatives-producing' paper-and-silver-nitrate-and-salt method that the classical-language-andmathematics-trained William Henry Fox Talbot (1800–1877) had developed in 1835 together with his assistant Nicholaas Henneman (Jenkins 1976). Another way to respond to that objection could be to say that Christianus here not only might have wanted to indicate that this daguerreotype would be considered 'old' as seen from a modern perspective, but also as seen from the perspective of a person living in the era that The Late Victorian coffee house represents. So for a late Victorian, that daguerreotype would already Backstage Drama here, do they? Or plagueish? 26 KATHERINE: No. They look rather peaceful. 27 CHRISTIANUS: And organized. 28 KATHERINE: Yes. But maybe it isn't them? What does the caption say? I don't have my reading glasses. 46 be 30–50 years old, since it was taken in the early Victorian age (cf. speech at 111:29). But it was also old in another sense. Because of the gradual disappearance of daguerreotypes in general - after the introduction of the collodion wet-plates in the 1850s, the dryplates in the 1870s, and, not the least, Kodak's handheld camera in the late 1880s (Chapman 1988; Shranz 1993, p. 72) - daguerreotype technology was, by then, old technology. THELMA CHAPMAN (1988), 'The Victorian Camera: Development and Technique' in Victorian Life in Photographs. Introduction by William Sansom. Photographic research: Harold Chapman; research consultant: John Hillelson; picture selection and layout: Ian Mackenzie-Kerr. London: Thames and Hudson, pp. 27–30. W. JEROME HARRISON (1887), A History of Photography: (Written As) A Practical Guide and an Introduction to Its Latest Developments. With a bibliographical sketch of the author, and an appendix by Dr. Maddox on the discovery of the gelatino-bromide process. New York: Scovill Manufacturing Company. REESE V. JENKINS (1976), 'Talbot, William Henry Fox' in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Scientific Biography, vol. x111 (Hermann Staudinger–Giuseppe Veronese). New York: Scribner's Sons, pp. 237–239. HERBERT OHLMAN (1990), 'Information: Timekeeping, Computing, Telecommunications and Audiovisual Technologies' in Ian McNeil, ed. An Encyclopedia of the History of Technology. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 686–758. P. SCHRANZ (1993), 'camera' in Leslie Stroebel and Richard D. Zakia, eds., The Focal Encyclopedia of Photography. Boston: Focal Press, pp. 70–73. GASTON TISSANDIER (1877), A History and Handbook of Photography. Translated from the French. Edited by J. Thomson. With upwards of seventy illustrations. London: Sampson, Low, Marston, Low, & Searle and New York: Scovill Manufacturing Company. 111:128, caption: Though the word 'caption' many times may be used in the sense of 'text passages that accompany photographs and illustrations', it may also carry various legal meanings, such as, for example, 'a part of a legal instrument, such as an indictment, showing where, when, and by what authority it was executed' (Guralnik 1978, p. 211; cf. Morris 1973, p. 201; Marckwardt 1966, p. 199) or 'a heading showing the names of the parties, court, and docket number in a pleading or deposition' (Guralnik 1978, p. 211; cf. Marckwardt Wendy's Risky Role-Play 29 CHRISTIANUS: It says, 'The Last Great Chartist Rally, Kennington Common, 0 April 848.' 30 KATHERINE: 848? But that's not late Victorian! 3 CHRISTIANUS: Of course it isn't. And the horses 1966, p. 199). So the idea might be that Katherine here not only is looking for an 'informative' text, but one which might serve as evidence in a more formal sense. DAVID B. GURALNIK, ED. (1978), Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language. Second college edition. Cleveland, OH: William Collins and World Publishing Co. ALBERT H. MARCKWARDT, ED. (1966), Funk & Wagnalls Standard Dictionary of the English Language, vol. 1. International edition. New York: Funk & Wagnalls Company. WILLIAM MORRIS, ED. (1973), The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language. New York: American Heritage Publishing and Houghton Mifflin Company. 111:129, Kennington Common: This is the place in London where the great Chartist meeting took place in 1848. After much work by Mr. Oliver Davis and others (Montgomery 1889, pp. 47–48), the Common was 'converted into a Park by the Kennington Common Inclosure Act of 1852' (Sheppard 1956, p. 31). The Common Land was located to the south-east of what is today's Kennington Park Road, in areas 11 and 12 of Fig. 3 in Sheppard (1956, p. 18). H. H. MONTGOMERY (1889), The History of Kennington and Its Neighbourhood, with Chapters on Cricket Past and Present. London: H. Stacey Gold, and Hamilton Adams & Co. F. H. W. SHEPPARD (1956), Survey of London, vol. 26: The Parish of St. Mary Lambeth. Part Two: Southern Area. London: The Athlone Press, for the London Country Council. 111:130, not late Victorian: If we understand the term 'Victorian' as denoting that time in history when Queen Victoria was in reign, then one might, with J. F. C. Harrison and others, position the late Victorian times between 1875 and 1901 (Harrison 1990; ref. supra, note 'this era' at 111:35). And even if one were to accept, for instance, Rowell's idea of a Victorian period from 1792 to 1914 (Rowell 1978, pp. vii–viii, 6; ref. supra, note 'it's quite popular' at 1:34), it still would be difficult to claim that the Kennington Common meeting on 10 April 1848 would be a late Victorian event. Therefore, Katherine seemingly has a valid point. J. F. C. HARRISON (1990), Late Victorian Britain 1875–1901. London: Fontana Press. 111:131, horses . . . facing left: We know that William Edward Kilburn 47Backstage Drama weren't actually facing left, either. But as an 'atmosphere builder', I think this reproduction works. It sets the stage for later Victorian developments. took at least two daguerreotypes of that Chartist meeting at Kennington Common on 10 April 1848, since Prince Albert acquired them and they ended up in the Royal Collection: D1 with one flag in the mid-foreground (Kilburn 1848a), and D2 with two (or three) flags (Kilburn 1848b). The trouble is just that those two daguerreotypes - just like the one Christianus and Katherine are looking at - are reproduced the wrong way, with the horses facing left instead of right. Though it may be tempting, without researching the matter more thoroughly, to quickly conclude that the big (dark) numbers on the bright-coloured flags must be directly readable (i.e., not be reversed, or horizontally flipped), there are other, less prominent, texts to be found in these pictures that also must not be reversed, including a text that covers one side of the big car. And since a person present at Kennington Common would not have been able to go behind the car to read any of its text (since the text is on the non-transparent side of the car itself ), it is more likely that that text should not be seen reversed on the daguerreotype than the numbers on the flags (which very well could have been readable from the opposite side). Therefore it seems necessary to follow (some aspects of ) Goodway, who has claimed (though perhaps a little too optimistically) that the (whole) text 'LABOUR THE SOURCE OF ALL WEALTH' can be seen on the car (Goodway 1982, p. 141). However, a closer inspection of D1, using maximum magnification, only reveals the word 'SOURCE' in the middle and a final 'H' in the rightmost word; the other words are not clearly visible, partly because of a handful of gentlemen with high hats who are standing close to the car, blocking the view, and partly because of the too low resolution (but maybe Goodway was able to inspect the original daguerreotype, and thus could see more detail?). In any case, once we have identified the word 'SOURCE', regardless of what other words may be surrounding it, we can be pretty sure that this is the right orientation, and that, therefore, the numbers on the flags should be reversed, and that the horses should be facing right, on both daguerreotypes. This may be even further corroborated by considering also other factors, such as, for example, the approximate time of the picture, the shadows generated by the sun, and the location of the industrial buildings in the background. And there is also additional pictorial evidence, apart from these two daguerreotypes, that further corroborates these observations. For on Saturday, 15 April 1848, the Illustrated London News published a picture of that same event called 'The Meeting on Kennington-Common.-From a Daguerreotype' (ILN 1848, p. 242), where the number '3' on the light-coloured flag in the mid48 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 32 KATHERINE: OK. But what does all of this have to do with you? 33 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I made it. 34 KATHERINE: You made it? 49 foreground is reversed, and where one horse is facing right, and where Kennington Common and the buildings in the background are all oriented in the same way as they are on the two corrected, horizontally flipped daguerreotypes (D1f and D2f). Although the 'orientation issue' of the two daguerreotypes now might be considered resolved, there is seemingly yet another issue, pertaining not only to the ILN illustration and a possible third daguerreotype, but also to D1f. For Goodway claims that the ILN illustration was 'derived mainly from the first daguerreotype (Figure 10) [D1f], but presumably a third, destroyed photograph provided the detail for its lefthand portion' (Goodway 1982, p. 141). But Goodway's statement is problematic. For the right-hand portion of D1f simply doesn't look like the righthand portion of the ILN illustration: in D1f there is no man stepping down from (or up on) a horse; there is no flag with the number '3' (reversed, or otherwise); and the crowds are not in the same place or arranged in the same way. Consequently, it seems far-fetched to propose that the artist should have used D1f in this way. And although the idea of a D3 is sound, why propose that D3 did not cover the whole scene of the ILN illustration? Would it not be more natural to simply suggest that D3 covered the very same scene as that of the ILN illustration, especially since the ILN caption did not say 'From two daguerreotypes'? But perhaps Goodway thought that D3, for some reason, could not, by itself, have covered a greater area than any of the two other daguerreotypes? But what if the D3 photographer wasn't Kilburn? Or, even if he was, what if he used a different camera? Or what if the photographer simply located himself at a slightly greater distance, and thus were able to cover a slightly greater area? The tentative conclusion must therefore be that if D3 existed, it covered the same area as the ILN illustration; and if Goodway does not have any factual evidence that D3 is 'destroyed', then it may very well still exist somewhere. DAVID GOODWAY (1982), London Chartism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1848), Saturday, 15 April 1848, vol. 12, no. 547. WILLIAM EDWARD KILBURN (1848a), View of the Great Chartist Meeting on Kennington Common. RCIN 2932484 [Daguerreotype D1: one flag in the mid-foreground with a '2' not reversed]. Scanned daguerreotype retrieved from The Royal Collection website [http:// www.royalcollection.org.uk] on Thursday, 8 March 2012. WILLIAM EDWARD KILBURN (1848b), View of the Great Chartist Meeting on Kennington Common. RCIN 2932482 [Daguerreotype D2: two (or three) flags in the mid-foreground: one with a '3' not reversed, and one (or two) with some other Backstage Drama 35 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. I made a copy from my old Morgan history book. Owen neither had the time nor the book, so he asked me. 36 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. But I was more interested in hearing about your chartist activities. 37 CHRISTIANUS: You just did. Isn't photocopying good enough for you? 38 KATHERINE: Sure it is. But I mean, other than that? Are you part of a political movement? With a list of demands? 39 CHRISTIANUS: There are always demands, in every sphere of activity. Whether you are a chartist or not. number(s)]. Scanned daguerreotype retrieved from The Royal Collection website [http://www.royalcollection.org.uk] on Thursday, 8 March 2012. 111:131, It sets the stage: It is interesting to note that Christianus keeps the discussion in the temporal realm, continuing talking about historical developments in the Victorian era, instead of taking it in a more philosophical direction. It appears that he here otherwise had an excellent opportunity to lay the groundwork for his (allegedly) discoverist-laden satisfactionism, and therefore could have said, for instance: 'It sets the stage for a discussion on discrepancies, which we can find in every nook we look', after which he - not always being a very 'tough-minded' philosopher (Hanson 1958, p. 58) - might have continued talking about things such as 'anomalies' (Kuhn 1996, pp. 52–65) and 'saving the phenomena' (Popper 1968, pp. 82, 246–247). So why didn't he? NORWOOD RUSSELL HANSON (1958), Patterns of Discovery: An Inquiry into the Conceptual Foundations of Science. Cambridge: At the University Press. THOMAS S. KUHN (1996), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Third edition. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press. KARL R. POPPER (1968), Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge. New York: Harper & Row. 111:135, old Morgan history book: Since 'old' is not very precise, and 'Morgan' not an altogether rare name, and 'history' also not a very rare (part of a) 50 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 40 KATHERINE: Well, that may . . . 4 CHRISTIANUS: But a modern chartist, especially of the satisfactionist variety, does not think that his own demands are for everyone. So he doesn't have a political agenda like the Victorian Chartists did. 42 KATHERINE: But what does a modern chartist do, then? 43 CHRISTIANUS: He demands. 44 KATHERINE: What? 45 CHRISTIANUS: A map. 46 KATHERINE: How do you mean? 47 CHRISTIANUS: He maps people. 51 title, many books may fit Christianus's description. Nevertheless, I think it would be difficult to find many such books that also had a daguerreotype of the Chartist gathering at Kennington Common on 10 April 1848 and where the horses (and all other objects) were reproduced the wrong way, facing left instead of right. Therefore, I would suggest, it is highly probable that the book in question is Kenneth O. Morgan's The Oxford Illustrated History of Britain, in which such a 'wrong-headed' daguerreotype can be found (Morgan 1989, p. 443). One may also note that the daguerreotype in Morgan's book is accompanied by the exact same caption that Christianus reads to Katherine. Note, however, that Morgan's caption does not end after that sentence; there are two more sentences to go. But perhaps Christianus consciously chose not to reproduce those last two sentences when he photocopied it, to make 'his' caption extra short and sweet? KENNETH O. MORGAN, ED. (1989), The Illustrated History of Britain. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 111:138, list of demands: As Katherine seems aware of, the Victorian Chartists had a list of demands. Those demands, the famous 'Six Points' of the People's Charter, were - as paraphrased from a handbill published in 1838 (reproduced in Finn 1992, p. 14; Rees 1995, p. 8) - the following: (1) Every sound-minded man twenty-one years of age (who also was not presently undergoing punishment for crime) should be able to vote. (2) Voting should be done with the help of a ballot system, to secure the anonymBackstage Drama 48 KATHERINE: Maps? 49 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Draws. Charts. Arrows. Colours. Et cetera. 50 KATHERINE: What is he drawing? Or charting? 5 CHRISTIANUS: I just told you. Arrows. Colours. Don't you listen? 52 KATHERINE: But what are the arrows and colours for? What does the chart, or map, show? 53 CHRISTIANUS: People's propensities. 54 KATHERINE: Propensities? 55 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Including their propositional and emotional position, speed, and direction. 56 KATHERINE: You mean what people think? And feel? 57 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And do. And what they did think, and feel, and do. And what they most likely will think, and feel, and do. And so on. 52 ity of the elector. (3) Members of Parliament should not have to own property, so that also poor people would be able to get elected. (4) Members of Parliament should receive a salary, so that also poor people could stay in that new position, once elected. (5) There should be equal voting areas, so that all voters would get the same fair share of the representation. (6) There should be annual Parliaments, to make it much more costly to bribe the voters than if they were to vote only once in seven years. JOE FINN (1992), Chartists and Chartism. History at Source. London: Hodder & Stoughton. BOB REES (1995), Chartism. Oxford: Heinemann. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 58 KATHERINE: So he's some kind of social science statistics stud? 59 CHRISTIANUS: I would say more student than stud. Or, if you like, less studdish than studious. 60 KATHERINE: But social science is right? And statistics? 6 CHRISTIANUS: To an extent. But he's more personally pragmatic than most social anthropologists are. 62 KATHERINE: How so? 63 CHRISTIANUS: He normally doesn't waste his time writing long, tedious papers for publication in sterile, peer-reviewed publications. 64 KATHERINE: Why not? 65 CHRISTIANUS: Because then he wouldn't have time to actually use the information that he has compiled. 66 KATHERINE: So he is not only a hunter-gatherer, but also a consumer, one could say? 53 111:149, Draws. Charts. Arrows. The general idea behind these staccato utterances seems clear enough. But one may wonder about what type of words these are. One possibility is that Christianus intended them all to be verbs, perhaps because he wanted to stress the idea that there is a lot of action involved, as opposed to some endless amount of passive armchair philosophizing or telly-watching. Another possibility is that this is yet another occasion where Christianus's word-play tendencies are surfacing, and perhaps are intended to demonstrate how a 'true' language-wizard can softly and seemingly seamlessly go from a verb to a noun via a verb-noun - and still make (some) sense. Backstage Drama Of information? 67 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And of people. 68 KATHERINE: But only certain people, right? 69 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. A very select group. 70 KATHERINE: So we're full circle. 7 CHRISTIANUS: How do you mean? 72 KATHERINE: You're judging people! 73 CHRISTIANUS: No. I am researching them. So that I can determine with whom I want, and do not want, to associate. That's the issue. I am not judging them, or cursing them, to go to hell, or even to a cell. That would be a tremendous waste of time and energy. 74 KATHERINE: Damn! 75 CHRISTIANUS: What did I . . . ? 76 KATHERINE: No, no, it's not you . . . Oh, my goodness! U–u–u–u-h-h-h! 77 CHRISTIANUS: Katherine! What's the matter? 78 KATHERINE: I just h-a-v-e to go to the restroom. Now! 79 CHRISTIANUS: Go, girl! Go! It's right here! 80 KATHERINE: But keep your eyes open - u-uu-h-h-h - for a table! 8 CHRISTIANUS: OK, OK, I will. Just go! 54 Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE IV. A Really Relaxing Rendezvous  CHRISTIANUS: Everything OK, juice girl? 2 KATHERINE: Yes, yes. Finally! 3 CHRISTIANUS: Good. 4 KATHERINE: Any free tables yet? 5 CHRISTIANUS: Nope. 6 KATHERINE: Any waitresses? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Nope. 8 KATHERINE: But look! Baldy just scored! 9 CHRISTIANUS: Rats! A slam-dunk! Just when I didn't look! I can't believe it! 0 KATHERINE: We needed that table! Irritating!  CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Do I hear a lawsuit coming up? 2 KATHERINE: Ha ha! No, not today. 3 CHRISTIANUS: Tomorrow? 4 KATHERINE: No. 5 CHRISTIANUS: Why not? 6 KATHERINE: He actually helped us, earlier. Remember? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. But that wouldn't stop a lawyer, would it? 8 KATHERINE: Of course not. But I'm not in the mood. And I really do think it was fair play. 9 CHRISTIANUS: You do? 20 KATHERINE: Yes, he was first. 2 CHRISTIANUS: First? 22 KATHERINE: Yes. He apparently saw the table first, and then he also swiftly took action before anyone else did. 23 CHRISTIANUS: Like a weasel! 24 KATHERINE: Well, quickly, anyhow. 25 CHRISTIANUS: But weasels . . . 26 KATHERINE: And, if that's not enough, there is also another thing. 27 CHRISTIANUS: What? 28 KATHERINE: He also was first inside. 29 CHRISTIANUS: Are you sure? 30 KATHERINE: Positive. I saw him go in, just before you arrived. Late, I may add! 3 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Sorry. 56 1v:35, iffs: Although Christianus here could have said just 'ifs', it seems more likely that he instead would be a little extra clever and say 'iffs'. The vibratory difference would be minimal, and it is therefore quite unlikely that Katherine would pick up on it and thereby 'ruin' the flow of the dialogue by inquiring about it, particularly since Christianus also adds the well-known word 'plaintiff' right after - a word that Katherine must know so well that it may act like a magnet on her (mind), and thus 'attenuate' the importance of the preceding word 'iffs'. And since it seems possible to understand (one dimension of ) Christianus's rhyming ideas just by using one of the two words, the pragmatic-mindWendy's Risky Role-Play 32 KATHERINE: So I actually think he is less to blame than you. 33 CHRISTIANUS: So it's fiffs? 34 KATHERINE: Fiffs? 35 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Rhymes with iffs and plaintiffs: F-I-F-S. FIFS. 36 KATHERINE: What's that? 37 CHRISTIANUS: First In, First Seated. 38 KATHERINE: Ah! Yes. But there's also another rule. 39 CHRISTIANUS: Oh? 40 KATHERINE: M-L-M-H-R-M. 4 CHRISTIANUS: M-L-M-H-R-M? Hmmm. Many Lawyers' Metabolisms Happily Recycle Muffins? 42 KATHERINE: Ha ha. No. Mural Ladies Must Have Real Men. 43 CHRISTIANUS: Real Men? You mean Baldy? 44 KATHERINE: Yes. The Mural Lady now has a Real Man under her, in the right posi57 ed Katherine may very well (quickly) decide to decipher the sentence simply using the word 'plaintiffs', without worrying about any 'iffs' or 'ifs'. 1v:37, First In, First Seated: The expression 'First In, First Seated' seems to be some kind of algorithm, whose initial condition ('First In') somehow or other determines, or is connected to, the result ('First Seated'). Those with a computer science background, or with an interest in algorithms and queues, may here think of FIFO ('First In, First Out'), FILO ('First In, Last Out'), etc. 1v:44, Real Man under her: In order for Baldy (the Real Man) to be 'under' A Really Relaxing Rendezvous tion. Just in time for a potentially potent midday session, as you suggested earlier. 45 CHRISTIANUS: But I didn't suggest Baldy. 46 KATHERINE: Maybe not. But I'm just protecting the interests of My Lady. 47 CHRISTIANUS: Your Lady? 48 KATHERINE: Well, aesthetically speaking. In spirit. 49 CHRISTIANUS: I see. So now she's your domina? Your mastress? 58 the Mural Lady in any close physical sense, (at least) two conditions seem necessary: first, that he sits rather close to the wall of the mural; second, that all, or at least most, of his body is under hers, and, perhaps in particular, below the level of the seat of that very horizontal marble bench that is so prominent in the Pleading scene (cf. supra, note 'tealcoloured scarves' at 111:20). One example of a mural and a sitting arrangement that might have enabled Baldy to enter into such a physical relationship with The Mural Lady - and which also might resemble the arrangement in The Late Victorian coffee house in terms of how these physical objects would be located - can be seen in the photographs of the (modern, peopleless) Oscar Bar & Restaurant located in the Charlotte Street Hotel in London (Firmdale Hotels 2012, pp. 4–5; but note that, probably unlike the mural in The Late Victorian, the Oscar mural continues from one wall to another). Another example, seen in a photograph not only filled with people but also (seemingly) from the Victorian period, illustrates more clearly the idea of the positioning of Baldy's body, and especially his head: it should not touch, or just barely touch, the lower part of the mural (Briggs and Miles 1989, pp. 94–95). ASA BRIGGS AND ARCHIE MILES (1989), A Victorian Portrait: Victorian Life and Values as Seen Through the Work of Studio Photographers. New York: Harper & Row. FIRMDALE HOTELS (2012), Charlotte Street Hotel. London: Firmdale Hotels. Brochure in PDF format retrieved from the Firmdale Hotels website [http://www. firmdale.com] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. 1v:49, domina: While the English version of Cambridge University's Latin textbook simply proposes that domina means 'mistress' or 'madam' (Greig 1996, p. 213), the American version provides an important extra piece of information when it suggests that it also can mean 'lady (of the house)' (Phinney 2003, p. 216) - a suggestion that more Wendy's Risky Role-Play 50 KATHERINE: Yes. 5 CHRISTIANUS: And, to please her, you evaluate the 'realness' of a man by your standards? How tall he is? Physically? 52 KATHERINE: Sure, that's one criterion. But he's also the only one without a moustache and a teal-coloured scarf. 53 CHRISTIANUS: Right. 54 KATHERINE: And with a job. 55 CHRISTIANUS: How do you know? 59 clearly establishes the domestic aspect of this word and its historical relationship to words meaning 'house' or 'home', such as Lat. domus, Gr. domos, Russ. dom, Skt. dama-, etc. (Buck 1988, pp. 457–459). And together with the idea of power (over someone or something) that is implicit in words like 'mistress' (e.g., 'A woman who has the care of or authority over servants or attendants, and, in early use, of children or young women'; Little 1980, p. 1337; ref. supra, note 'venerean' at 11:58), one may easier appreciate the domination aspect of the relationship between such a 'lady' ruler and her household slaves (cf. Fowler 1965, p. 138) - an aspect also found in the closely related word 'dominatrix', which seems to have been in use at least since the time of Cicero (106–43 B.C.) (Lewis and Short 1891, p. 608). CARL DARLING BUCK (1988), A Dictionary of Selected Synonyms in the Principal Indo-European Languages: A Contribution to the History of Ideas. With the co-operation of colleagues and assistants. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. H. W. FOWLER (1965), A Dictionary of Modern English Usage. Second edition. Revised by Sir Ernest Gowers. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. [CLARENCE GREIG, JOHN A. JONES, ET AL.] (1996), Cambridge Latin Course: Unit I. Integrated Edition with Language Information. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. CHARLTON T. LEWIS AND CHARLES SHORT (1891), A New Latin Dictionary. Founded on the Translation of [William] Freund's Latin-German Lexicon, edited by E. A. Andrews. New York: Harper & Brothers and Oxford: At the Clarendon Press. ED PHINNEY, PATRICIA E. BELL, AND BARBARA ROMAINE, EDS. (2003), Cambridge Latin Course: Unit 1. The North American Third Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press. 1v:49, mastress: This word is not found in most dictionaries. And even though 'mastress' does appear in various forms A Really Relaxing Rendezvous 56 KATHERINE: Just look at him! That's what I'm talking about! 57 CHRISTIANUS: You mean his fake Rolex and ridiculous Ray-Bans? 58 KATHERINE: They are neither fake nor ridiculous. And neither are his expensive badboy-black leather jacket or his delightfully delicious designer jeans. Or his perfect smile! 59 CHRISTIANUS: Well, maybe there is something to it. After all, dental care is expensive. Especially in Britain. 60 KATHERINE: So you agree? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Unless, of course, he simply is one of those golden-goose guys who doesn't need a dental job. Or any job. 62 KATHERINE: OK, OK. I get it. So let's just skip the job requirement. 63 CHRISTIANUS: Skip it? 64 KATHERINE: Yes. It wasn't my main point, in 60 in the Shorter OED, with the meaning 'mistress', Little does not mention any specific literary works in which it occurs (Little 1980, p. 1288; ref. supra, note 'venerean' at 11:58). However, one might, for example, find the word 'mastress' in an English translation of Pedro Calderón de la Barca's Life Is a Dream (Calderón de la Barca 1910, p. 65). PEDRO CALDERÓN DE LA BARCA (1910), Life Is a Dream [translated by Edward Fitzgerald] in Charles W Eliot, ed., The Five-Feet Shelf of Books, 'The Harvard Classics', vol. 26: Continental Drama: Calderon, Corneille, Racine, Molière, Lessing, Schiller. New York: Collier, pp. 5–68. 1v:59, dental care is expensive: Christianus's statement seems to fit well with a 2008 article in The Independent, Wendy's Risky Role-Play any case. 65 CHRISTIANUS: I am surprised, Katherine! Really surprised! So Social Security checks are OK? 66 KATHERINE: Are you insane? Absolutely not! 67 CHRISTIANUS: Why not? 68 KATHERINE: He must be able to take care of himself. 69 CHRISTIANUS: But he can! 70 KATHERINE: And his family. 7 CHRISTIANUS: What family? 72 KATHERINE: And not just survive, either. Have a life! A real life! 73 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. 74 KATHERINE: So he needs to provide! 75 CHRISTIANUS: Goodness. Poor Baldy. 76 KATHERINE: Some real money. 77 CHRISTIANUS: But what if the checks were generous? Or even very generous? 61 which reported that a study done at the department of health management at the Berlin University of Technology had found that - of the nine European countries surveyed - Britain was the one with the most expensive dental treatment (Laurance 2008). Including the cost of all the materials and resources needed (such as x-rays, drugs, and the time of the dentist), a regular filling was €156 (£117) in England but only €8 in Hungary. JEREMY LAURANCE (2008), 'Ouch! British dental care the most expensive in Europe: Europe-wide study reveals huge gulf in dental prices' in The Independent, 10 January 2008. Online article retrieved from the Independent website [http://www.independent.co.uk] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. A Really Relaxing Rendezvous 78 KATHERINE: Not a chance. 79 CHRISTIANUS: So what are we talking about? A million pounds sterling in a respectable bank, inherited from an equally respectable father? Or two? Would that work? 80 KATHERINE: Make it ten, and we'll talk. And you can skip 'respectable', if that's a problem for you. I'm not Victorian. 8 CHRISTIANUS: Ten million? 82 KATHERINE: And without a prenup, of course. 83 CHRISTIANUS: It's a bargain! 84 KATHERINE: Chris, I'm just representing My Lady. It's not for me! 85 CHRISTIANUS: Right. I forgot. 86 KATHERINE: Anything else? 87 CHRISTIANUS: But what about Love? How much is that worth? 88 KATHERINE: As I said, ten million. 89 CHRISTIANUS: What about some extra serenades at night? No discount? 90 KATHERINE: Dream on, Romeo! 9 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. 92 KATHERINE: And time is running out. 93 CHRISTIANUS: A countdown, too? You're good! 94 KATHERINE: Well, it's just that there's a time and place for everything. 62 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 95 CHRISTIANUS: At least we can agree on that! 96 KATHERINE: So what do you say: shall we leave her alone, for now? 97 CHRISTIANUS: Already? 98 KATHERINE: Well, I don't sense that we have an agreement. 99 CHRISTIANUS: I don't sense it either. 00 KATHERINE: And it's also almost noon, and My Lady needs to prepare Herself for a really relaxing rendezvous. 0 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Sure. And with Baldy no longer at the statue, our next destination is quite clear, isn't it? 02 KATHERINE: Absolutely! Let's go! 63A Really Relaxing Rendezvous SCENE V. Baldy's Barbie-Babes  KATHERINE: We made it! 2 CHRISTIANUS: At last! Good ol' Maggie! 3 KATHERINE: Maggie? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Magdalene. Didn't you take art history? 5 KATHERINE: I did. But we didn't cover any white marble statues. In any coffee shops. In London. 6 CHRISTIANUS: Oh. So you only took an intro course, then? Modern Miami Crap Art History 0, or something? Or the more specialized South Beach variant, perhaps? 7 KATHERINE: That was almost funny, Chris. 8 CHRISTIANUS: Good. But isn't she beautiful? With her gaze? 9 KATHERINE: I'm not so much into statues. v:8, her gaze: If Kern is right, there may be something very important to be said about the Victorian gaze (Kern 1996; ref. supra, note 'teal-coloured scarves' at 111:20). However, the extent to which Christianus is appreciating Kern's ideas is hard to estimate. But it does not seem unreasonable to propose that Christianus at least (partly) would accept the more general idea that 'seeing is not an unbroken gazing' (Summers 1991, p. 197). DAVID SUMMERS (1991), 'Conditions and Conventions: On the Disanalogy of Art and Language' in Salim Kemal and Ivan Gaskell, eds., The Language of Art History. Cambridge Studies in Philosophy and the Arts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 181–212. Especially when they have such a lofty, philosophical look. There's no romance there. Just brain waves. 0 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm, yes. Magdalene does seem to be a thinker of sorts. But you have to agree: her pose is much better than Rodin's!  KATHERINE: Absolutely. And her complexion too. But she's still too bulky! 2 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, space is always a concern with live sculptures. Which is why the interior decorator said the whole air conditioning system had to be placed under her, if they at all should have one. 3 KATHERINE: Hmmm. I hope she doesn't get a cold, though, sitting on it? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Well, the AC isn't always working, anyways. 5 KATHERINE: But it's humming along, isn't it? And not so discreetly, either. 6 CHRISTIANUS: Right. It's definitely a Hummer. v:10, Magdalene . . . pose: After comparing many different statues of potential (Mary) Magdalenes, one may come to the conclusion that Christianus and Katherine are looking at (a reproduction of ) the Magdalene sculpture that currently resides in the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge University. This beautifully crafted marble sculpture of Magdalene was made by Pompeo Marchesi in 1832, and was apparently acquired by the Fitzwilliam Museum in 1974 (Fitzwilliam Museum 2012). However, it seems rather unlikely that Christianus (and Katherine) would agree with Fitzwilliam Museum's statement that this sculpture of Magdalene depicts her as 'glamorous yet contrite' (Fitzwilliam Museum 2012). 65Baldy's Barbie-Babes 7 KATHERINE: Definitely. 8 CHRISTIANUS: But who knows if it's actually working? 9 KATHERINE: I would worry more if I didn't hear it. 20 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe. But vacuum cleaners are also noisy. And they don't always work either. Or produce very clean air. 2 KATHERINE: Chris, you worry too much. 22 CHRISTIANUS: I do? 23 KATHERINE: Yes. About the wrong things! 24 CHRISTIANUS: Really? 25 KATHERINE: Yes. Really! And you neglect all the important stuff! 26 CHRISTIANUS: Such as? 27 KATHERINE: The air outside! 28 CHRISTIANUS: What about it? We're inside! 29 KATHERINE: All that carbon dioxide! And global warming! 66 Wendy's Risky Role-Play More details about the Pompeo Marchesi statue can be found in one of the exhibition catalogues of the Heim Gallery, in which it is called 'The Magdalen' (Heim Gallery 1972, no. 49). FITZWILLIAM MUSEUM (2012), 'Mary Magdalene'. Online article retrieved from the Fitzwilliam Museum website [http://www.fitzmuseum.cam.ac.uk] on Tuesday, 10 April 2012. HEIM GALLERY (1972), Paintings & Sculptures, 1770–1830: Autumn Exhibition, September 11–December 21, 1972. London: Heim Gallery. v:10, pose . . . better than Rodin's: If Christianus is not thinking about Rodin himself, he is most probably talking about his work The Thinker - something which Katherine seems to under30 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! You're funny, Katherine! Really funny! 3 KATHERINE: Funny? 32 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. You really should get up on that little mini-stage over there! Don't be shy! Go for it! Miami's Got Talent! Yeah! 33 KATHERINE: I don't follow. 34 CHRISTIANUS: To be really funny, one has to, on occasion, be able to be very serious. As if one really meant it. Like Seinfeld. He knows. And apparently you do too! Splendid performance! Just splendid! 35 KATHERINE: But I really meant it, Chris! I am serious! 36 CHRISTIANUS: You are? 37 KATHERINE: Yes. Man-made global warming is absolutely nothing to joke about. I would never think of it. It's a real problem! 38 CHRISTIANUS: Are you still joking? Because if you are, it's really, really good! Larry 67Baldy's Barbie-Babes stand, even though the reference in such a case, in a somewhat mysterious way, first would pass through Rodin, and then continue onwards to the ruminator and his pose. For a reproduction of the smaller (70 cm high) version of The Thinker, see, for example, Reynolds 1992 (p. 41). DONALD MARTIN REYNOLDS (1992), The Nineteenth Century. The Cambridge Introduction to Art. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. v:38, Larry David . . . ecstatic: It may be difficult to visualize the idea that Larry David would have been (externally) ecstatic here, especially since one of his shows was named Curb Your Enthusiasm. But maybe that is (part of ) Christianus's point? David would have been ecstatic! 39 KATHERINE: I am sorry to disappoint you, but I'm serious. Dead serious. 40 CHRISTIANUS: Then we have a problem. 4 KATHERINE: Finally! 42 CHRISTIANUS: Sorry, but I should have said 'you', not 'we'. 43 KATHERINE: I have a problem? 44 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. If you believe those jokesters at the BBC and the NYT. 45 KATHERINE: Jokesters? 46 CHRISTIANUS: They'd make anything up to get better ratings. And to keep their jobs. So why listen to them? Anthropogenic global warming is just another scam, long in the making. And so are many other news stories. 47 KATHERINE: Scam? Have you lost your mind? Shall I call the men in white? 48 CHRISTIANUS: Go ahead! You can even call those in black, if you want. But not for my sake! I am not gay, or alien! Ha ha! 49 KATHERINE: I don't see anyone else needing emergency treatment! 50 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Relax, Katherine. Relax! 5 KATHERINE: How can I? I'm still freaking standing! Next to an annoyingly noisy 68 Wendy's Risky Role-Play marble Hummingbird. In a crowded café without waitresses or coffee. Or anything to eat! And then - after an eternity of in-house touring - Chris the conspiracy theorist starts! 52 CHRISTIANUS: I am not a conspiracy theorist. 53 KATHERINE: You certainly have fooled me! 54 CHRISTIANUS: I think of myself more as a factualist. Or, perhaps, even better, as a fictionalist. 55 KATHERINE: Well, at least it sounds better. But what does it mean? 56 CHRISTIANUS: That global warming very well may be true. 57 KATHERINE: Oh? Really? Good! 58 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I mean, not necessarily right now. But it certainly may be, at some point. 59 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 60 CHRISTIANUS: Man-made global warming, however, is a different story. It's not only a piece of ill-crafted fiction, but also a scam. 6 KATHERINE: You're not giving up so easily, are you? 62 CHRISTIANUS: Why would I? For the sake of some mishy-moushy 'political politeness'? It's not my game, that's for sure! Ha ha! 69Baldy's Barbie-Babes 63 KATHERINE: I get that. But what would the motive be? Why would someone simply make up a story? 64 CHRISTIANUS: Why don't you ask one of the latest Nobel Prize Laureates? 65 KATHERINE: I am sorry? 66 CHRISTIANUS: Or just anyone. 67 KATHERINE: OK? 68 CHRISTIANUS: Because they like it. 69 KATHERINE: Like what? 70 CHRISTIANUS: The story. The play. And the way they can position themselves in it. 7 KATHERINE: Position? 72 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Because they are unhappy. With their position. 73 KATHERINE: You mean with their life? 74 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, without those stories. 75 KATHERINE: So they create stories? To get happier? 76 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Those who are satisfied don't need such stories. 77 KATHERINE: How do you mean? 78 CHRISTIANUS: Take Baldy, for instance. 79 KATHERINE: OK? 80 CHRISTIANUS: And let's assume that he is as 70 Wendy's Risky Role-Play rich as you think he is. Or would like him to be. 8 KATHERINE: OK. 82 CHRISTIANUS: Why would a guy like that waste his precious time on making up stories about how rich he is going to be? He's already rich! 83 KATHERINE: Maybe he has nothing else to do? 84 CHRISTIANUS: Unlikely. With his machomagnetic appearance, and his customdesigned blue Ferrari rebelliously, and very visibly, misparked just outside one of those new, trendy bars, he can get any babe he wants, any day of the week. So why wouldn't he have anything else to do? He's already living the dream! 85 KATHERINE: Dating all those superficial Barbie dolls? 86 CHRISTIANUS: Actually, he's not so much into dating. He's more into variety. Continuous variety. 87 KATHERINE: A player? 88 CHRISTIANUS: What else could he be? And how do you know that those Barbies are superficial, or merely superficial? Or that they are more superficial than those who are not very hot? 89 KATHERINE: It's just that . . . 71Baldy's Barbie-Babes 90 CHRISTIANUS: So he's already ruling. He doesn't need to daydream very much about money or women. In those areas, he's king. Everything just works. Automatically. No revision needed. 9 KATHERINE: But? 92 CHRISTIANUS: He has a health problem. 93 KATHERINE: But he looks great! 94 CHRISTIANUS: Nevertheless. 95 KATHERINE: What's wrong? Herpes? Gonorrhea? AIDS? 96 CHRISTIANUS: No. It's his lungs. After a lifetime of smoking. 97 KATHERINE: That doesn't sound that bad. 98 CHRISTIANUS: You obviously haven't heard him cough yet. It goes on and on. And on. 99 KATHERINE: OK, but . . . 00 CHRISTIANUS: So whenever he has some spare time, he is doing his story-thing. How to proceed. How to become better. How to heal. 0 KATHERINE: You mean he's trying to figure out his health options? How to survive? All by himself? 02 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 03 KATHERINE: Why doesn't he simply go to some 72 Wendy's Risky Role-Play expert doctor, so that he doesn't have to waste his time dreaming up all these stupid stories? Is he retarded or something? 04 CHRISTIANUS: No more than I am. 05 KATHERINE: That's a relief! 06 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Yes. So as an expert player, he not only knows his way around the basketball court; he also knows exactly how to navigate in the so-called 'real world'. With so-called 'real people'. 07 KATHERINE: OK? 08 CHRISTIANUS: So he knows, from his own experience with thousands of encounters, that people never really act unselfishly, or without motives. It may just seem like that, if one doesn't scratch the surface. 09 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 0 CHRISTIANUS: So he is well aware that people always are very carefully managing their own position in their own, particular story-space. In a complex, multi-dimensional play-array of values, roles, motives and emotions.  KATHERINE: Are you talking about social norms? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, that too. And since Baldy's health is much more important to himself than to anyone else, he decided not to trust anyone, including those doctors. So he conducts his own research. 73Baldy's Barbie-Babes 3 KATHERINE: So he's not trusting medical science? Or the physicians? What a fool! 4 CHRISTIANUS: No. He is very bright and well informed. He now knows more about how to heal himself than most regular doctors do. In fact, he might even be eligible for next year's local Ready-toRole-Play Competition for aspiring satisfactionists. If he just can beat his lung cancer before February. 5 KATHERINE: Whatever. 6 CHRISTIANUS: Whatever? No compassion? Lung cancer! 7 KATHERINE: It's just a stupid game! 8 CHRISTIANUS: There is nothing 'just' about this game. Or any game. It's the real deal. 9 KATHERINE: And what does all this nonsense have to do with the BBC and the NYT, anyways? And with global warming? It's science! 20 CHRISTIANUS: Science is a just a pile of stories. Just like literature is. Or the news. 2 KATHERINE: Come on, Chris! Grow up! 22 CHRISTIANUS: The main difference is simply how moving they are. Are the stories be74 Wendy's Risky Role-Play v:118, There is nothing 'just': The word 'just' seemingly plays a very important role in this sentence. One way to understand its importance would be to regard it as a modifier that 'blocks' Katherine's idea that games are not very important or that games are not 'serious', or something like that. On such a lievable? Are they entertaining? And do we feel an urgency to act? Or not? 23 KATHERINE: Oh, my! 24 CHRISTIANUS: So we should not underestimate them. 25 KATHERINE: Who? The Eskimos? 26 CHRISTIANUS: For example. Or the Bar Council. Or the rappers down the street. 27 KATHERINE: Come on! Really! 28 CHRISTIANUS: Hold on, Katherine. Just hear me out. 29 KATHERINE: All right, all right. Here we go again! 30 CHRISTIANUS: It's simple. People just love stories. Therefore people use stories to try to grab power. If you have the right story, you can get ahead. But if you have the wrong one, you might end up with nothing. Or even less. 3 KATHERINE: So? 32 CHRISTIANUS: So everyone in the rat race needs a good story. A story that solves a problem. A story that moves. A story that pays. Either in dollars or, as in Bal75Baldy's Barbie-Babes reading we might then say that Christianus here is trying to tell Katherine that games are more important than she thinks they are. Another way to understand the word 'just' would be to read it in a more philosophical way, as having to do with some aspects of ethics and the philosophy of law. In that dy's case, in sensuous sessions with the hottest hotties. 33 KATHERINE: So it's all about money? 34 CHRISTIANUS: No. But if you follow the money, you'll see it. It's about power. Who's ruling, and who's not. 35 KATHERINE: But why all this talk about stories? What does it have to do with my life? 36 CHRISTIANUS: In order to get anywhere, storywise, you first have to learn how to rule your own body. So you need some narrative support for that. 37 KATHERINE: I'm not sure what you mean. 38 CHRISTIANUS: If you cannot even control your own body, how will be able to control the kind of hot guys that you want to impress on? So unless you want to end up as a slave, why try to allure someone whom you eventually won't be able to control? Remember Roy in Vegas? Grrrr! 76 Wendy's Risky Role-Play case one might suggest that Christianus here may be pointing out that the philosophical concept of 'justice', as well as any ideas depending on it, actually are not applicable, at least not in any absolute sense. v:138, Roy in Vegas: The proper noun 'Roy' most probably refers to Roy Horn of Siegfried and Roy, the two magicians who had one of the most successful shows in Las Vegas in the history of show business (ABC News 2009): 'We followed our dreams, for dreams were all we had. In the process our lives became magical' (Siegfried and Roy 2012). Whether or not this 'dream-following' idea would fit into Christianus's discussion on people who are searching for a better position is not entirely easy to evaluate. But we can at least assume that neither Christianus nor Katherine would say that 39 KATHERINE: I do. But that was a tiger! 40 CHRISTIANUS: That's exactly my point. If you're playing in Baldy's league, there is a different set of rules. If there are any rules at all! 4 KATHERINE: I don't think I can do it. 42 CHRISTIANUS: How do you mean? 43 KATHERINE: I am not interested in some lonely guru-in-a-cave type of life, if that's what you're saying. 44 CHRISTIANUS: Are you kidding? Am I in a cave now? 45 KATHERINE: No. 46 CHRISTIANUS: Unlike you, I am not a nothingness philosopher. So why would I recommend some boring Buddhist monastery or mediocre mâyâvâdi âshrama? Or one of those encaved Himalayan hermits whose only 'friends' are the yetis and the neti-netis? 77 the 'material' position of Mr. Horn (in March 2007, three and a half years after that tiger incident) was a better or more 'magical' one than the one he had had prior to that gory event. SIEGFRIED AND ROY (2012), 'Biography'. Online article retrieved from the Siegfried and Roy website [http://www. siegfriedandroy.com] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. ABC NEWS (2009), 'Siegfried and Roy's Journey'. Elizabeth Vargas anchors 'Siegfried and Roy: The Magic Returns'. 7 March 2009. Video retrieved from the ABC News website [http://www.abcnews. go.com] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. v:146, mâyâvâdi: The Sanskrit root √vad 'speak' (cf. Eng. 'word') is a building block that is used to create many other words, and parts of words, such as pratyayas, suffixes (cf. Whitney 1988, Baldy's Barbie-Babes 47 KATHERINE: Actually, I have heard some spooky fairytales about Tibetan yetis. Are the neti-netis similar? Just as hairy and scary? And imaginary? 48 CHRISTIANUS: The neti-netis seem to be just pp. 152–153; Monier-Williams 1899, pp. 939–940; Egenes 2000, p. 7). This root may be seen as the origin of, for instance, two closely related suffixes -vâda and -vâdi, often encountered in discussions on Indian philosophy. The vriddhi 'strengthening' (or lengthening) of the 'a' in √vad, resulting in the long 'â' in -vâda and -vâdi, may be seen as an introduction of the idea of 'aboutness' or (causal, generative) 'fromness', so that the vriddhied result would be about or of the idea contained in the original root (cf. Monier-Williams 1864, p. 24). Thus -vâda may mean 'speaking of or about', 'mentioning', 'thesis', 'proposition', 'argument', doctrine' (Monier-Williams 1899, pp. 939–940), and hence also 'a philosophy'. Similarly, -vâdi may mean 'speaking or talking about' or 'the teacher or propounder or adherent of any doctrine or theory' (Monier-Williams 1899, p. 940), thus denoting 'a philosopher'. As for mâyâ, it is usually translated as 'that which is not' or 'illusion' or '[that which is] not real' (Prabhupâda 1990, p. 31; cf. Raju 1957, p. 292). Thus, the term mâyâvâda denotes the 'illusion' or 'nothingness' school of philosophy (e.g., Shankara's advaita philosophy), or, in Monier-Williams's translation, 'the doctrine affirming the world to be illusion (applied to the doctrine of the Vedânta and of Buddhism)' (MonierWilliams 1899, p. 811). Therefore, the term mâyâvâdi points to a philosopher adhering to such an illusory or nothingness-like doctrine - a doctrine that, for all practical purposes, boils down to impersonalism and atheism. In this context it is also relevant to point out that, just as atheists seldom talk of themselves as atheists, proponents of mâyâvâda philosophy seldom talk of themselves as mâyâvâdîs (cf. Klostermaier 2002, p. 109). Therefore, noting that Christianus here uses that very word, and also in the previous sentence has declared that he is not a nothingness philosopher, we may be quite sure that he himself is not a mâyâvâdi. THOMAS EGENES (2000), Introduction to Sanskrit. Part Two. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. KLAUS K. KLOSTERMAIER (2002), Hinduism: A Short Introduction. Oxford: Oneworld Publications. MONIER [MONIER-]WILLIAMS (1864), A Practical Grammar of the Sanskrit Language, Arranged with Reference to the Classical Languages of Europe, for the Use of English Students. Third edition, much enlarged and improved. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press. MONIER MONIER-WILLIAMS (1899), A Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Etymologically and Philologically Arranged with Special Reference to Cognate Indo-European Languages. New edition, greatly enlarged and improved with the collaboration of E. Leuman, C. Cappeller, and other scholars. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press. 78 Wendy's Risky Role-Play as 'real' as the yetis are, and perhaps even more so. But they are, unfortunately, the proud proponents of a phenomenally foolish philosophy. 49 KATHERINE: How does it work? 79 A. C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI PRABHUPÂDA (1990), The Journey of Self-Discovery. Mumbai: The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. P. T. RAJU (1957), 'Post-Samkara' in Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, ed., History of Philosophy: Eastern and Western, vol. 1. Sponsored by the Ministry of Education, Government of India. London: George Allen & Unwin, pp. 287–304. WILLIAM DWIGHT WHITNEY (1988), The Roots, Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit Language. A Supplement to his Sanskrit Grammar. New Haven, CT: American Oriental Society. Originally published in 1885 by Breitkopf und Härtel (Leipzig) and Trübner & Co (London). v:146, âshrama: Although the word âshrama may mean different things, it seems fairly reasonable to read it here as 'hermitage' (Macdonell 1924, p. 43). ARTHUR ANTHONY MACDONELL (1924), A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary, with Transliteration, Accentuation, and Etymological Analysis Throughout. London: Humphrey Milford, for the Oxford University Press. v:146, yetis: The 'abominable snowman', also known as the yeti, 'features strongly in Sherpa mythology' (Woodhatch 1997, p. 427). Some 'inexplicable footprints' were reported already in 1898 by Wassell in Sikkim (Woodhatch 1997, p. 427). Then Bill Tilman 'tracked yeti footprints for over a mile' in 1938, after which Eric Shipton photographed one on the Menlungtse glacier in the Himalayas in 1951 (Mayhew and Bindloss 2006, p. 353; photograph reproduced in Bradbury 1983, p. 111). And the 1985 Pilkington Everest Expedition reported that 'they came to a line of large prints running across the glacier', also noting that they knew 'full well they were the first expedition there that year', after which Jon Tinker, a climber and an Exeter University graduate, said 'Saw what looked like Yeti prints', while adding, casually, 'and I ain't a believer' (Greig 1999, p. 107). WILL BRADBURY (1983), In i det okända. Stockholm: Det Bästa. Original edition (1981): Into the Unknown. Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest Association. ANDREW GREIG (1999), Kingdoms of Experience: Everest, the Unclimbed Ridge. Edinburgh: Canongate. BRADLEY MAYHEW AND JOE BINDLOSS (2006), Nepal. London: Lonely Planet Publications. TOM WOODHATCH (1997), Nepal Handbook. Bath: Footprint Handbooks. v:146, neti-netis: This most probably refers to those philosophers who are subscribing to, or are interested in, different kinds of neti-neti philosophy. For more on the neti-netis and their philosophical method, see infra, note 'phenomenally foolish philosophy' at v:148, and note 'Sort of ' at v:152. Baldy's Barbie-Babes 50 CHRISTIANUS: It's very straightforward. Not this, not that - neti this, neti that. Neti-neti. 5 KATHERINE: Double negation? 52 CHRISTIANUS: Sort of. 53 KATHERINE: And? 54 CHRISTIANUS: That's it. 55 KATHERINE: That's all? 56 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. As I said: foolish! 57 KATHERINE: So what are you saying, then? I mean, about me? 58 CHRISTIANUS: About you? The long version, or the short? 80 v:148, phenomenally foolish philosophy: It may be significant that Christianus here uses the word 'phenomenally'. Although it is plain that appearances and phenomena can be misleading, and that they, on their own, do not always indicate the exact underlying mechanism by which the universe operates, Christianus himself presumably still thinks that we must use these appearances to construct a positive theory of the complete cosmos (material and spiritual), and avoid theories that are built on mostly negative conceptual ground, such as those in 'negative theology' or 'via negativa', etc. (cf. Braine 1998). Christianus might therefore think that the neti-netis are foolish because they categorically reject the phenomena as a means to discover the greater cosmos, using their official excuse, 'whatever we imagine it to be, it will be wrong' - an unscientific attitude that probably would make Christianus categorize them as nothing but philosophical escape artists of the most insincere kind. For more on neti-neti philosophy, see infra, note 'Sort of ' at v:152. DAVID BRAINE (1998), 'Negative Theology' in Edward Craig, ed., Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vol. 6 (Luther– Nifo). London: Routledge, pp. 759–763. v:152, Sort of: Christianus's response to Katherine's idea of a 'double negation' probably indicates that this is not how he himself should have described it. First of all, we can be reasonably sure that Christianus is not referring to any double negation in 'standard' symbolic logic terms (but cf. Dummett 1998 on intuitionistic logic, pp. 178–179), where the two negations would amount to an 'annihilation', as in Hacking's exWendy's Risky Role-Play 59 KATHERINE: The short one, please! 60 CHRISTIANUS: No. No. No. 6 KATHERINE: OK? 62 CHRISTIANUS: Too short? 63 KATHERINE: A little. 64 CHRISTIANUS: All right. If satisfaction is your soul-goal, then don't follow the neti-netis. Don't try to negate yourself into nothingness. Don't do away with all desires, dreams, hopes, ambitions, and friends. 65 KATHERINE: Really? 66 CHRISTIANUS: Really. I mean, even if you 81 ample of the 'double denial' where ~~P and P are 'logically equivalent' (Hacking 1972, p. 126). Nor does Christianus seem to refer to the idea of 'the negation of the negation' that Zahner attributes to Hegel, and perhaps also to orthodox Christian and Sufi doctrine (Zahner 1971, p. 150). But what does Christianus mean, then? It seems likely that the kind of negation that he has in mind is not actually limited to 'double'. For the twice occurring term 'neti' (in 'neti-neti') simply signifies the general idea behind the philosophy, namely to negate whenever and wherever necessary; consequently, the neti-netis negate just as many times as they see fit. Dasgupta describes, in a section called 'Unknowability of Brahman and the Negative Method', how some philosophers mentioned in the Upanishads were propounding the 'negative method' when trying to describe what Brahman (God) is, or, rather, is not: 'Yajñavalkya said \"He the âtman is not this, nor this (neti neti)' (Dasgupta 1997, p. 44). The idea behind this kind of thinking is that '[w]e cannot describe it [Brahman] by any positive content which is always limited by conceptual thought' (Dasgupta 1997, p. 45) - a stance that may lead some philosophers to recommend not just limitless negation, but absolute silence, as when Bâhva instructed Vashkali: 'I teach you indeed [with my own silence] but you do not understand; the Âtman is silence' (Dasgupta 1997, p. 45). SURENDRANATH DASGUPTA (1997), A History of Indian Philosophy, vol. 1. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. Originally published in 1922 by Cambridge University Press. MICHAEL DUMMETT (1998), 'The PhiBaldy's Barbie-Babes were Robinson Crusoe you would have a friend on a day like this. After first having experienced some unsatisfying nothingness. 67 KATHERINE: I thought you were saying that I should avoid making new acquaintances? 68 CHRISTIANUS: No. The idea is simply that you should select them very carefully. So that they won't interfere with your real desires, hopes, and ambitions. That's all. 69 KATHERINE: Oh! 70 CHRISTIANUS: So you can be free to set some real goals for yourself. Personal goals. Higher goals. 7 KATHERINE: Higher goals? Come on, Chris! I'm hungry! 82 losophy of Mathematics' in A. C. Grayling, ed., Philosophy 2: Further Through the Subject. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 122–196. IAN HACKING (1972), A Concise Introduction to Logic. New York: Random House. R. C. ZAEHNER (1971), Mysticism: Sacred and Profane. Oxford: Oxford University Press. v:166, a day like this: After inspecting some archived weather reports and forecasts, one might argue that the London weather that day might not have been very much like the weather on one of the Caribbean islands on the day when Robinson Crusoe met his new mate. For example, the Dawn weather forecast suggests, under the heading 'Today', that the London weather on 23 March 2007 (Rabi-ul-Awwal 3, 1428) is, or is likely to be, a day with showers, 76% humidity, a min temperature of 5 °C, and a max temperature of 11 °C (Dawn 2007); and the WeatherOnline UK graphs show, for London City, a pressure of 1016 hPa (or millibar), 78% relative humidity, and a max temperature of 8 °C (WeatherOnline UK 2007a, 2007b, 2007c). Thus, since the London weather may not have been very Caribbean, it is not impossible that Christianus here is not trying to refer to the weather when Wendy's Risky Role-Play 72 CHRISTIANUS: Sure, but where to sit? 73 KATHERINE: What should we do, then? 74 CHRISTIANUS: Move on? 75 KATHERINE: You mean to another café? 76 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 77 KATHERINE: No, I really looked forward coming here. 78 CHRISTIANUS: But you are here! 79 KATHERINE: Sure. But I haven't tried their famous coffee yet. Or the scones. Or even the chairs! 80 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. So you'd like to stay? 8 KATHERINE: Yes. he says 'a day like this'. Perhaps he instead uses that phrase simply to point to the current day of the week? If that is, or was, the idea, then we might conclude that it certainly worked very well, especially since he uttered it on a Friday. But is this possibility - that his comment only would have worked on a Friday - a reason to think that this interpretation is wrong? In other words, is the existence of this once-a-week condition somehow decreasing the probability that the dayof-the-week interpretation is nicely in line with Christianus's (original or revised) intention(s)? DAWN (2007), 'Weather; March 23, 2007'. Retrieved from the Dawn website [archives.dawn.com/2007/03/23/ weather.htm] on 3 April 2012. WEATHERONLINE UK (2007a), 'London City (AP): Max temperature °C Mar 03 2007 – Mar 31 2007'. Retrieved from the WeatherOnline UK website [weatheronline.co.uk] on 3 April 2012. WEATHERONLINE UK (2007b), 'London City (AP): Pressure hPa Mar 03 2007 – Mar 31 2007'. Retrieved from the WeatherOnline UK website [weatheronline.co.uk] on 3 April 2012. WEATHERONLINE UK (2007c), 'London City (AP): Relative humidity % Mar 03 2007 – Mar 31 2007'. Retrieved from the WeatherOnline UK website [weatheronline.co.uk] on 3 April 2012. 83Baldy's Barbie-Babes SCENE VI. The Owen Problem  CHRISTIANUS: Any ideas? 2 KATHERINE: Why don't we return to the mural? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Literally? 4 KATHERINE: We don't have to move, if that's what you are afraid of. I'd just like to hear more about that mural. It's so romantic! 5 CHRISTIANUS: The mural? I am not sure what to say. Especially if you are looking for something romantic. 6 KATHERINE: But didn't you say that Owen didn't have any artistic sensibilities? Or something like that? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 8 KATHERINE: But then you also said that he made the mural? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Right. v1:17, Vaishya: When Christianus here is talking about some facets of a 'caste' system, he is most probably not referring to the jati ('birth') system in modern India (cf. Wolpert 1993, p. 41). It is more probable that he refers to the ancient Vedic varna ('colour') system, with its brâhmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and shudras, and to the idea that one's 'caste' is determined by what kind of (daily) activities one actually is engaged in, regardless of which family one was born into. The classical definition of the kind of activities that a vaishya might be engaged in can be found in Chapter 18, Text 45 of the Bhagavad-gîtâ: 'farming, cow protection and business are the natural work for the vaishyas' [Skt. kri- 0 KATHERINE: How could that be?  CHRISTIANUS: What is your question, exactly? 2 KATHERINE: How in the whole world could something so absolutely beautiful be made by someone who has no artistic sensibilities whatsoever? If that's what you are saying? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Listen, Katherine: Owen is an almost pure vaishya. 4 KATHERINE: A what? 5 CHRISTIANUS: A vai-sh-ya. 6 KATHERINE: Is he some Hindu guru or something? A-a-a-o-o-o-u-u-u-m-m-m! 7 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Owen the Scot? No, no. F-a-a-a-r from it. Vaishya simply means businessman. That's all. 8 KATHERINE: So? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Well, a true businessman always ponders how he is going to get the money, right? 20 KATHERINE: Sure. I know people like that. 85 shi-go-rakshya-vânijyam vaishya-karma svabhâva-jam] (Prabhupâda 1986, p. 828; cf. pp. 238–239). But we may note, as Christianus himself indicates later on, that a potential 'impurity' also may occur; so although one may associate 'vaishyas with mercantile activities . . . the match is imperfect' (Smaje 2000, p. 15). A. C. BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI PRABHUPÂDA (1986), Bhagavad-gîtâ As It Is. Mumbai: Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. CHRIS SMAJE (2000), Natural Hierarchies: The Historical Sociology of Race and Caste. Malden, MA and Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. STANLEY WOLPERT (1993), A New History of India. Fourth edition. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. The Owen Problem 2 CHRISTIANUS: And a good businessman is one who actually ends up with a fair amount of money. Otherwise, he is not very good, is he? 22 KATHERINE: No, he isn't. Or she! 23 CHRISTIANUS: Right. So by learning from other businesspersons who already have made it, one can learn to be a good one. 24 KATHERINE: Presumably. But one can, of course, also have a lot of natural talent? Right? 25 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. Some just have it in their blood, while others may have to be taught. And some end up as college professors. 26 KATHERINE: You mean those who can't, teach? 27 CHRISTIANUS: Not exactly. It's not just about who can and cannot do business; it's also about who can and cannot teach. And there are other questions as well. 28 KATHERINE: Where are you going with this? 29 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I wish I could say that we now would be going to our own table with this information. But I can't see a single free one yet. Can you? 30 KATHERINE: No. It looks like we're stuck here. No-one is moving. 86 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 3 CHRISTIANUS: At least not to the extent that they are leaving their tables. 32 KATHERINE: Right. But what about Owen? 33 CHRISTIANUS: Owen? He's not here today. It's Venus-day. Remember? 34 KATHERINE: Yes, but . . . 35 CHRISTIANUS: And even if he were here, he would not help us. 36 KATHERINE: Why not? Is he a monster? 37 CHRISTIANUS: Well, he does have some mean cookies. 38 KATHERINE: But a monster? 39 CHRISTIANUS: No, that's probably an exaggeration. But I still think that it would be fair to say that some of his facial features would not be left untouched by a truly caring dermatologist or plastic surgeon. 40 KATHERINE: But surely he is no Elephant Man, is he? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Not exactly. But his business ethics is quite a monstrosity to behold. 42 KATHERINE: His business ethics? 43 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. It goes something like this: 'No customer is special. Treat all customers nicely, without favouring any of them. And get their money as fast as you can. Cash is King Kong!' 87The Owen Problem 44 KATHERINE: Hmmm. Talk about monstrosity! 45 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely! So even if he were here, we still would have to wait for a table. 46 KATHERINE: OK, but there's one thing I don't understand. 47 CHRISTIANUS: What's that? 48 KATHERINE: What has Owen to do with college professors? 49 CHRISTIANUS: Not much, I'm afraid. 50 KATHERINE: Then why mention it? 5 CHRISTIANUS: It's just that I meant something very particular when I said that Owen is an almost pure vaishya. 52 KATHERINE: What? 53 CHRISTIANUS: Well, Owen is not a theory person. 54 KATHERINE: You mean he doesn't like to speculate, like college professors love to do? 55 CHRISTIANUS: Correct. But he also doesn't like listening to other people's speculations. 56 KATHERINE: I see. So that means he's not interested in being or becoming a stock broker or commodities broker either? Even though he is - what did you call it? - a vahyischia? 57 CHRISTIANUS: Vai-sh-ya. 58 KATHERINE: Vai-sh-ya? 88 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 59 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Good. Actually, I think he once had an internship at one of the big banks, years ago. But it didn't work out. 60 KATHERINE: What happened? 6 CHRISTIANUS: They didn't like him. 62 KATHERINE: Why not? 63 CHRISTIANUS: Because he wasn't very productive. 64 KATHERINE: What has productivity to do with it? 65 CHRISTIANUS: Everything. Especially in the currency markets, where he was. 66 KATHERINE: How so? 67 CHRISTIANUS: If you don't make enough money even to pay for your own wage, how can they afford to keep you? 68 KATHERINE: But surely they didn't just lay him off immediately? I mean, wasn't it an internship? Some sort of educational program? 69 CHRISTIANUS: Well, they have their business ethics. And philosophy of education. 70 KATHERINE: Which is? 7 CHRISTIANUS: I think their motto was 'No compassion, just business'. Or was it 'Make money, not friends'? I don't remember; I always mix them up. But you get the idea. 72 KATHERINE: Definitely. 89The Owen Problem 73 CHRISTIANUS: But the 'productivity' thing was only a part of 'The Owen Problem'. 74 KATHERINE: There's more? 75 CHRISTIANUS: You bet. 76 KATHERINE: I'm listening. 77 CHRISTIANUS: Well, one problem was Owen's attitude. 78 KATHERINE: Attitude? 79 CHRISTIANUS: Well, he's not the smoothest guy out there. 80 KATHERINE: OK. But who wants a wimp, anyway? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Right. But Owen almost always says exactly what he thinks. On the spot. And he doesn't take shit from anyone. 82 KATHERINE: Uh-oh. 83 CHRISTIANUS: And he's also not one of those typical college brats you might find at the big commercial banks. Which is why he didn't want to hang out with them. 84 KATHERINE: You mean he doesn't come from a wealthy family? 85 CHRISTIANUS: No, that's not the problem. Or at least not the fact. 86 KATHERINE: So he does come from a good family? 87 CHRISTIANUS: If 'good' is to be understood as 90 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 'rich', then you're right on the money. But he's still not one of those typical college brats. 88 KATHERINE: Are you trying to say that he never joined that whole Greek fraternity thing? 89 CHRISTIANUS: Something like that. 90 KATHERINE: Is it that, or is it just something like that? 9 CHRISTIANUS: He didn't want to be ruled by his father. So he didn't go to any university. Not even to the University of London. 92 KATHERINE: Really? 93 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But that's not all. 94 KATHERINE: There's more? 95 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. 96 KATHERINE: Yes? 97 CHRISTIANUS: He also refused to follow his father's other recommendation. 98 KATHERINE: What was that? 99 CHRISTIANUS: To join his family's ancient secret society. 00 KATHERINE: Which is? 0 CHRISTIANUS: So secret you've never even heard of it. 02 KATHERINE: I see. Is it in London? 91The Owen Problem 03 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But some rites are in Scotland. 04 KATHERINE: Creepy! 05 CHRISTIANUS: Definitely. Not to speak of all those sea monsters! 06 KATHERINE: Yes. And I definitely don't like their dialect either. It's s-o-o-o ugly! 07 CHRISTIANUS: I actually haven't come across any reports about Nessie, or any of her friends, speaking. Where did you hear that? 08 KATHERINE: Don't play dumb. It doesn't work. 09 CHRISTIANUS: All right. And what shall we say about their kilts? 0 KATHERINE: Ohhh-Myyyyy-Goddddd! Hideous!  CHRISTIANUS: And their bagpipes? 2 KATHERINE: Even worse! 3 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. It's obviously some sort of demonic race, or something. I mean, who could stand all those diabolic sounds and visions all day long without thinking one were in hell? 4 KATHERINE: Absolutely! And we haven't even touched upon their weather yet! 5 CHRISTIANUS: Excellent point! 6 KATHERINE: But tell me one thing, Chris. 7 CHRISTIANUS: What? 92 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 8 KATHERINE: If Owen is so 'unqualifed' or 'unsuitable' as you seem to suggest, how could he end up with that internship in the first place? 9 CHRISTIANUS: His dad is, or at least was, on the bank's board of trustees. So he fixed him in, somehow or other. To keep an eye on him. And also, of course, to try to mould him into something 'usable'. 20 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. Hmmm. Difficult situation. 2 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But Owen, of course, wasn't - and still isn't - overwhelmingly malleable. 22 KATHERINE: Right. 93The Owen Problem SCENE VII. Just Follow the Money  KATHERINE: So what now? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Now we'll just follow the money. 3 KATHERINE: How do you mean? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Well, wouldn't you agree that a person's consciousness may give us some information about the kind of actions he may perform? 5 KATHERINE: I am not sure. I haven't heard your whole story. 6 CHRISTIANUS: Right. Well, as I see it, one's 'caste' is, in many ways, created, from one's consciousness. 7 KATHERINE: How so? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Well, one could think of it as a product of one's emotions and beliefs. So if you are 'internally convinced' that you are afraid of spiders, how will you ever be able to accept that new position at the local zoo, requiring an endless amount of TLC for their new, horrendously hairy poecilotheria subfusca tarantula? 9 KATHERINE: Hmmm. I hate spiders. 0 CHRISTIANUS: So if you know a person's consciousness, then you can guess his 'caste'.  KATHERINE: I can guess his 'caste' anyway. Why do I need to know his consciousness for that? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I should have said, 'guess it, and be right'. 3 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. That's better. 4 CHRISTIANUS: And even if you cannot figure out everything about his casting potential, you may still get some insight into his approximate 'range of action'. 5 KATHERINE: You mean like, for example, if we know that a man is a real soldier at heart, it wouldn't be very far-fetched to predict that he might protect his own people in times of trouble, even without payment? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, something like that. Assuming, of course, that the kshatriya in question has very little vaishya tendencies, and also is endowed with a substantial amount of physical and mental strength, thus being fully committed to the idea of protecting the citizens in times of trouble, without worrying about any monetary compensation or even his own, personal safety. But how many soldiers are of that calibre today? 95Just Follow the Money 7 KATHERINE: Right. I see what you mean. Ksha-tri-ya? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 9 KATHERINE: So since Owen seemingly is more or less a pure businessman at heart, as you have said, we should simply follow the money? Is that your idea? 20 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 2 KATHERINE: So how do we do that, exactly? 22 CHRISTIANUS: Well, Owen knows that the amount of money he is going to get is more or less dependent on the number of paying customers. No customers, no money. 23 KATHERINE: Sure. As in so many other businesses. 24 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. So to get as many customers as possible, he would need some great coffee and some nice home-made sandwiches, buns, cookies, and so on. 25 KATHERINE: Why home-made cookies? And great coffee? I mean, wouldn't he be making more money if he just skipped that, and lowered the quality? 26 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe. Which is why I called him only almost pure. So even though he certainly does think about money all the time, he also thinks about his customers. 96 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 27 KATHERINE: Really? 28 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, believe it or not. And even if everything he is offering may not be super-duper high-quality stuff in terms of nutritional value and taste, it's still home-made, fresh and good enough to satisfy most people. 29 KATHERINE: So he wants his customers to be happy? 30 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, he likes that. When they are happy, he feels he is not cheating them. 3 KATHERINE: Oh, so he is not cheating them? 32 CHRISTIANUS: I didn't say that. It's just that happy customers, whether they are cheated or not, are returning customers. 33 KATHERINE: I see. 34 CHRISTIANUS: So it's about a positive experience both for him and for the customers. And it is not just about taste either. He feels a responsibility to only use organic, non-GMO grains and coffee. That way he knows that even if some of his customers suddenly die, get sick, become sterile, or evolutionize themselves into humansize flies or lizards, it's most probably not because of his products or services. 35 KATHERINE: I see. Guilt free. 36 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And with a price tag that 97Just Follow the Money many customers still can afford. 37 KATHERINE: Or at least are willing to pay. 38 CHRISTIANUS: Right. Also, of course, Owen recognizes the need for an attractive environment. He knows that customers are looking for nice, 'homey' places. 39 KATHERINE: Where they can have really relaxing experiences. 40 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha, right. And he also knows that colours, textures, and materials really matter. 4 KATHERINE: As does music. And art. 42 CHRISTIANUS: Certainly. But here's the problem: Since his aesthetic abilities and aspirations were, and still are, practically non-existent, he wasn't sure which colours, textures and materials to choose. Or what kind of art and music to select. 43 KATHERINE: So what did he do? Arrange a poll? 44 CHRISTIANUS: Why would he? 45 KATHERINE: To get some answers. 46 CHRISTIANUS: Answers? He is not interested 98 Wendy's Risky Role-Play v11:34, human-size flies: See, for example, the film The Fly (1986), where Seth Brundle the typical mad scientist, expertly played by Jeff Goldblum, develops into a human-size fly after a lab experiment on himself develops in a very strange and unsatisfying direction. THE FLY (1986), starring Jeff Goldblum, Geena Davis, John Getz. David Cronenberg (director, screenplay), George Langelaan (writer), Charles Edin any answers. He's neither a Gallup guy nor - as I've already pointed out - a college professor. He in it for the money. Remember? 47 KATHERINE: Yes. 48 CHRISTIANUS: So he simply hired some artists, musicians, and interior designers. To produce results, not answers. 49 KATHERINE: So some artist painted that mural? 50 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 5 KATHERINE: But you did say that Owen made the mural! 52 CHRISTIANUS: Certainly. 53 KATHERINE: But he didn't make it. Whoever painted it, did. Why are you so stubborn? 54 CHRISTIANUS: Because I am trying to make a point. 55 KATHERINE: What point? 56 CHRISTIANUS: Well, you're right that whoever painted the mural made it. 57 KATHERINE: Obviously! 58 CHRISTIANUS: But Owen also did. 99 ward Pogue (screenplay), Stuart Cornfeld (producer). A production by Twentieth Century Fox and Brooksfilms. Released on DVD in 2005 (in Europe) by Twentieth Century Fox. v11:48, results, not answers: This apparently means that Christianus is of the opinion that answers may not satisfy all people equally well. Christianus may also mean that answers are, taxonomically speaking, different, or even radically Just Follow the Money 59 KATHERINE: But you said he didn't paint at all! 60 CHRISTIANUS: True. 6 KATHERINE: So how can he have made it? 62 CHRISTIANUS: He paid for it. 63 KATHERINE: Paid for it? 64 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. If you can only pay for it, what's the difficulty getting it done? We are not talking about putting a man on the moon here. 65 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 66 CHRISTIANUS: And even if it's a really difficult project, like one of those multi-millionman-hour moon-landing-missions in the Apollo programme, it might still be realizable if you only have the money, the drive, and, of course, a sufficiently advanced technology. 67 KATHERINE: Sure. And Kennedy and Nixon 100 different, from results, and that this has something to do with varnas, âshramas, and social role-play. v11:64, getting it done: The point being made here seems to be that if a person has enough money, he can rather easily get things accomplished, especially when it comes to 'earthly' projects. So here Christianus seems to take a very obvious stance, agreeing with Randall Collins's initial observation in the section called 'Three Strategies: Money, Force, and Solidarity' (in Chapter 3, 'Paradoxes of Power') of his introduction to non-obvious sociology that '[t]he most obvious way to get other people to do something is to pay them to do it' (Collins 1982, p. 63). However, we can also rather easily imagine that Christianus, just like Collins, has more observations to make in this regard, and that his arsenal of arguments and viewpoints is far from being exhausted. RANDALL COLLINS (1982), Sociological Wendy's Risky Role-Play had all that. 68 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe. 69 KATHERINE: Maybe? 70 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, maybe. But just imagine if NASA would have refused to pay the thousands of employees their salaries, or their contractors, or had not had a sufficiently advanced technology at the time: how many men would then have walked the moon that summer night in 969? 7 KATHERINE: None? 72 CHRISTIANUS: Precisely. So money is, in some sense, and in some cases, a causal factor. 73 KATHERINE: Is anyone denying it? 74 CHRISTIANUS: I'm not sure. But Aristotle, for instance, didn't list it. 75 KATHERINE: Is that a problem? 76 CHRISTIANUS: Not for me. Insight: An Introduction to Nonobvious Sociology. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. v11:66, multi-million-man-hour: Note that Christianus here is using 'man hour' as opposed to, for example, 'man month'. It is possible that this has something to do with the experiences reported in Frederick P. Brooks's The Mythical Man Month (Brooks 1995). FREDERICK P. BROOKS, JR. (1995), The Mythical Man-Month: Essays On Software Engineering. Anniversary edition with four new chapters. Boston: Addison-Wesley. v11:70, NASA . . . employees: In the mid-1960s NASA's payroll averaged 36,000 people - and 'for every NASA staffer, there would be ten personnel in the private sector' (Bizony 2006, p. 79). The average yearly expenditure for the Apollo program was $4,000,000,000 (Nye 1997, p. 151). PIERS BIZONY (2006), The Man Who 101Just Follow the Money 77 KATHERINE: So why did you bring it up? 78 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it's always interesting to notice what people don't say. 79 KATHERINE: Chris? 80 CHRISTIANUS: Yes? 8 KATHERINE: I don't feel very well. 82 CHRISTIANUS: Should I get you some water? 83 KATHERINE: Thanks, but I'll be fine. I'm just so exhausted. It just came over me. I sometimes get these attacks. 84 CHRISTIANUS: Or should I call a cab? 85 KATHERINE: No, no. Don't be stupid. Absolutely not. It's just so god-damn irritating that we not even have a table yet. And no coffee. And nothing to eat. Jesus, have mercy! 86 CHRISTIANUS: With your sincere prayers, I am sure something will manifest quite soon. 87 KATHERINE: Chris, if you only would have come earlier! They had lots of free tables at ten o'clock. 88 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. I am very sorry about that. 102 Wendy's Risky Role-Play Ran The Moon: James Webb, JFK, and the Secret History of Project Apollo. Cambridge: Icon Books. DAVID E. NYE (1997), 'Don't Fly Me to the Moon: The Public and the Apollo Space Program' in Narratives and Spaces: Technology and the Construction of American Culture. Exeter: University of Exeter Press, pp. 147–160. v11:70, summer night in 1969: The transmission of Armstrong's 'That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind' (Ryan 1969, p. 120) But it's actually quite strange: I mean, it is never ever this busy here at this time of day. Even on a Friday. 89 KATHERINE: Unless it's one of those Cookie Monster Treat days, of course. 90 CHRISTIANUS: Right. I just didn't know. 9 KATHERINE: And where are all the waitresses? Or what do you call them around here? 92 CHRISTIANUS: I'm not sure. 93 KATHERINE: You're not sure where they are? Or what to call them? 94 CHRISTIANUS: Normally, there are two cute little waitresses running around here, with their stylish mini-skirts and long, well-waxed legs. 95 KATHERINE: Doesn't sound very Victorian. 96 CHRISTIANUS: I agree. But they are sexy. 97 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 98 CHRISTIANUS: And very professional. 99 KATHERINE: Prostitutes usually are! 00 CHRISTIANUS: But I haven't seen any of them. 103Just Follow the Money - whether that message originally was transmitted from the surface of the moon or not - was received by the Washington audience at approximately 10:56 p.m. on 20 July 1969, and by the Londoners at approximately 3:56 a.m. on 21 July 1969 (Ryan 1969, p. 6). PETER RYAN (1969), The Invasion of the Moon: The Story of Apollo 11. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. v11:72, a causal factor: It seems rather safe to note that Christianus here is not saying that money is the ultimate causal factor, 0 KATHERINE: Maybe they are taking care of some of their more intimate customers? Or maybe their pimp has arrived, unexpectedly? Through the back door? And is giving them a hard time? 02 CHRISTIANUS: Owen, you mean? Could be. 03 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 04 CHRISTIANUS: You're OK? 05 KATHERINE: Not really. But I'll survive. 06 CHRISTIANUS: Look! See those two stools over there, near the counter? 07 KATHERINE: Where the two old ladies sit? 08 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 09 KATHERINE: What about them? 0 CHRISTIANUS: Wouldn't they be great?  KATHERINE: Do you want to chase away the old ladies? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Not if I can avoid it. 3 KATHERINE: So? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Well, aren't they wrapping it up? Or am I just hallucinating? 5 KATHERINE: Actually, I think you're right! 6 CHRISTIANUS: Should we? 104 Wendy's Risky Role-Play or anything like that. For him, it seems, money (including, perhaps, also the promise of it) is just one of the possible causes. v11:122, Harrod's: For those who have not yet experienced Harrod's in 'real life', Harrod's website [http://www. 7 KATHERINE: Definitely! Let's grab them before someone else does! 8 CHRISTIANUS: But perhaps an ordinary table would be better? 9 KATHERINE: No, no. The counter is perfect. Fiffs! Go! 20 CHRISTIANUS: I am sorry to intrude, ladies, but are you two perhaps preparing to leave? 2 SELMA: Yes. 22 THELMA: Definitely. We can't sit here all day. We have lots of very important things to do. Harrod's is having a sale! 23 KATHERINE: A sale? 24 SELMA: Yes. 25 THELMA: With lots of savings! So we have to rush. But do try their home-made cookies. They are very delicious! 26 CHRISTIANUS: And the coffee? 27 SELMA: Good. 28 THELMA: Not good, Selma! Excellent! So you youngsters have something really nice to look forward to! 29 CHRISTIANUS: Great! 105 harrods.com] currently (Tuesday, 3 April 2012) offers 'Harrods 360' - a 360° virtual tour of its London store. Note especially the Egyptian escalator. Just Follow the Money 30 KATHERINE: Thank you! 3 SELMA: Good-bye! 32 THELMA: Bye-bye! It was nice talking to you. 33 CHRISTIANUS: Likewise. Bye. 34 KATHERINE: Bye. 106 Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE VIII. Katherine Has a Heart  KATHERINE: So what are you having? 2 CHRISTIANUS: I'll probably have their special coffee blend. 3 KATHERINE: And? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe two of their home-made scones, as usual. With marmalade and cheese. And what about you? 5 KATHERINE: Scones sound yummy. And some of that special coffee blend you always talk about. 6 CHRISTIANUS: Good. Wendy will appreciate it. 7 KATHERINE: Wendy? 8 CHRISTIANUS: The waitress. 9 KATHERINE: Old friend? 0 CHRISTIANUS: In a way.  KATHERINE: And? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Well, she is a really nice person. 3 KATHERINE: But? 4 CHRISTIANUS: But she sometimes mixes up orders. So it's good that we order the same thing. It will be easier for her. 5 KATHERINE: Right. 6 CHRISTIANUS: Here she comes. 7 KATHERINE: At last. 8 WENDY: Hi Chris! How are you? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Hi Wendy. I am good. And this is my American friend Katherine. 20 WENDY: Hi Katherine! First time in London? 2 KATHERINE: No, but first time here, in this café. 22 WENDY: Aha! A virgin visit! 23 KATHERINE: I guess you could call it that. And I must tell you - I really love the atmosphere! 24 WENDY: Yes, it has a certain ambience, doesn't it? At least when you don't have to work here. (Sigh. . .) So what are you two having? 25 CHRISTIANUS: I'll have your Creative Kilimanjaro, as usual. With cream, of course. 26 WENDY: Of course. 27 CHRISTIANUS: And then - u-u-u-h-h - two scones, with butter, cheese and marmalade. 28 WENDY: Very well. And for you, miss? Or is it Mrs? 29 KATHERINE: No, it's miss. And I'll have the same. 30 WENDY: Great. Thank you. Oh! And please 108 Wendy's Risky Role-Play be patient. I am alone now. 3 CHRISTIANUS: Alone? 32 WENDY: Yes. Shelly fell in the staircase, just after we opened. On her way down to the kitchen. 33 CHRISTIANUS: You're kidding? 34 WENDY: No. And we had to take care of her, and get her to the hospital. 35 CHRISTIANUS: Goodness! 36 KATHERINE: Is she all right? 37 WENDY: I don't know. Last I saw her, she was unconscious. 38 CHRISTIANUS: Is that the new one, who started last week? 39 WENDY: Yes. She's nice. But just a little too passionate. So have a little patience, OK? 40 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. 4 KATHERINE: What a ghastly story! 42 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. Especially if it's true. 43 KATHERINE: You mean she is lying? 44 CHRISTIANUS: I mean Wendy is Wendy. Anyhow, let's talk about you now. 45 KATHERINE: Me? 46 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. What did you do yesterday? 47 KATHERINE: Nothing much. I was at the hotel. 109Katherine Has a Heart 48 CHRISTIANUS: Sounds relaxing. 49 KATHERINE: Yes, it was. I actually slept until two. 50 CHRISTIANUS: Seriously? 5 KATHERINE: Yes. And I never do that. You know me. 52 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. Always on the go. 53 KATHERINE: Usually, yes. But now I'm desperately seeking sanity. And some energy just to stay awake. 54 CHRISTIANUS: I know, I know. Depressions are like that. 55 KATHERINE: Actually, it was almost a miracle that I managed to stay awake and check in at the hotel after our pizza the other night. All that philosophy made me super-tired. 56 CHRISTIANUS: But that mercurian cab driver of yours must have taken you quite quickly to the hotel? 57 KATHERINE: Sure. But it was a rough ride. It was just as if he thought the street corners were made of cottage cheese or something. 58 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, some coaches are operated by people who have a very vivid imagination. And a unique driving style. 59 KATHERINE: A style seemingly incompatible 110 Wendy's Risky Role-Play with any regulatory framework. At least in traffic law. 60 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha, right. But you made it to your hotel without any major injuries? 6 KATHERINE: No physical ones, at least. 62 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. Good. 63 KATHERINE: Anyway, so then when I woke up yesterday afternoon, I went down to the restaurant for breakfast. 64 CHRISTIANUS: Did you get any? 65 KATHERINE: Yes. The waiter was very helpful, even though I was so late. 66 CHRISTIANUS: Good. 67 KATHERINE: And then I went back to my room to read a bit and to take it easy. No phone calls, no internet. It almost felt weird! 68 CHRISTIANUS: I bet! But you really needed it, obviously. 69 KATHERINE: Yes. 70 CHRISTIANUS: So what were you reading? Some interesting book on the philosophy of law? 7 KATHERINE: No. They didn't have any legal literature in my hotel room. 72 CHRISTIANUS: Really? How inconsiderate of them! 111Katherine Has a Heart 73 KATHERINE: Absolutely! How dare they! 74 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! But maybe you brought some reading material with you from Florida, then? Or pick something up in one of the bookstores near your hotel? 75 KATHERINE: No bookstores yesterday. I had no energy. And I definitely didn't bring any books from home. I came here to take it easy, not to work or study. 76 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. I understand. 77 KATHERINE: And even if I had brought some of my books, they would all be gone by now anyway. I lost my luggage, remember? 78 CHRISTIANUS: Right! Your luggage! Has it materialized? 79 KATHERINE: No. And I haven't heard anything from the airline either. 80 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe you should call them, yourself? 112 Wendy's Risky Role-Play v111:78, Your luggage! Katherine's luggage problem was first discussed at 1:34–42 in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, pp. 4–6; ref. supra, note 'you're late' at 1:1). v111:86, The Yellow Book: One of the publications that specialized in literature and art was the quarterly The Yellow Book, a rather thick (Beardsley 1894: 272 pp.) and short-lived (1894–1897, 13 vols.) periodical, published in London. One typical cover (vol. 3, October 1894), clearly showing Beardsley's overrated cartoonish style, can be found in Briggs and Snowman (1996, p. 176); but since it is a black-and-white reproduction, it fails to show that typical yellow colour seen on its original covers (see, for example, Beardsley 1894). However, even if The Yellow Book and its Beardsleyan artwork was rather well received at the time, Gallatin and Wainwright think that Beardsley's best work was made from 1896 and onwards - '[t]he 8 KATHERINE: Yes, you're right. I should. But first I need to mobilize some more energy. After all, the whole point of me being here in London was that I wanted some time off from litigation and such things. 82 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, that's perfectly understandable. I mean, who wouldn't want to take time off from litigation and such things? 83 KATHERINE: Exactly. I need a few more lazy days, like yesterday, to recharge my soulbatteries. 84 CHRISTIANUS: So what did you read yesterday, then? The phone directory? 85 KATHERINE: No, I am not a numerologist. But I did find some other yellowish publications lying around. 86 CHRISTIANUS: Some old issues of the late Victorian The Yellow Book? 87 KATHERINE: No, just some new American magazines. 113 most resplendent period in the artist's life' - with, for instance, his drawings in The Savoy (Gallatin and Wainwright 1952, p. 2). For yet another (unimpressive) example of Beardsley's artwork, see the reproduction in Spalding of Arthur Glimpsing the Questing Beast (Spalding 1978, pp. 76–77). [AUBREY BEARDSLEY, ED.] (1894), The Yellow Book: An Illustrated Quarterly, vol. 1, April. London: Elkin Mathews & John Lane and Boston: Copeland & Day. ASA BRIGGS AND DANIEL SNOWMAN (1996), Fins de Siècle: How Centuries End, 1400–2000. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. A. E. GALLATIN AND ALEXANDER WAINWRIGHT (1952), The Gallatin Beardsley Collection in the Princeton University Library. Prineton, NJ: Princeton University Library. FRANCES SPALDING (1978), Magnificent Dreams: Burne-Jones and the Late Victorians. Oxford: Phaidon. Katherine Has a Heart 88 CHRISTIANUS: American magazines in a London hotel? 89 KATHERINE: Well, my hotel is owned by some international corporation. Maybe that's why? 90 CHRISTIANUS: Could be. So what did they have? Time? Newsweek? 9 KATHERINE: No. Those are usually not very yellow, are they? 92 CHRISTIANUS: Not if they are brand new. 93 KATHERINE: But they did have some copies of one of the leading geographic magazines. 94 CHRISTIANUS: Oh, really? They had copies of Globalist Geographic? Or United Nations Geographic? Or maybe even of One World Dictatorship Geographic? 95 KATHERINE: No, Chris. Cool down. They only had National Geographic. 96 CHRISTIANUS: Oh, I see. Well, it's basically the same thing, anyway. 97 KATHERINE: And they actually had the latest issue. How about that? 98 CHRISTIANUS: Really? Then you are ahead of me, reading-wise. I haven't even opened my own copy yet. 99 KATHERINE: You also had your hands on it? 00 CHRISTIANUS: Not on your copy. 114 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 0 KATHERINE: Of course not. But I didn't know you were reading National Geographic. Any copy. 02 CHRISTIANUS: Actually, I am a subscriber. 03 KATHERINE: You subscribe? 04 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 05 KATHERINE: You must be really interested in geography! 06 CHRISTIANUS: No. 07 KATHERINE: Then why in heaven's name do you subscribe? 08 CHRISTIANUS: Just to see what they are up to. 09 KATHERINE: Up to? 0 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Politically.  KATHERINE: Politically? It's about geography! And nature! And beautiful photography! 2 CHRISTIANUS: True. But there's also a political propaganda message in it, as in most professionally produced publications and broadcasts. Do you think it's a pure coincidence that it's published in Washington, D.C.? 3 KATHERINE: I don't know what to think. I haven't looked into it. I just read it, now and then. 4 CHRISTIANUS: Very well. The latest issue, you said? 115Katherine Has a Heart 5 KATHERINE: Yes. March 2007. 6 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. Yes. That's the one with a bunch of elephants on the front cover, right? And a Tiger on the back, with a fancy watch? 7 KATHERINE: I don't remember any tiger, other than the Vegas one. Or any watch. 8 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. Maybe I am mixing it up with some other issue? Or maybe we just have different editions? 9 KATHERINE: Perhaps. But the elephants were there, for sure. Standing in the river. 20 CHRISTIANUS: Right. And the picture is quite dark, overall. 2 KATHERINE: Exactly. It's either dusk or dawn. 22 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Or underexposed. 23 KATHERINE: Sure. But some of the elephants are very bright. So he must have used a flash or some other extra light. 24 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, I remember that. The picture simply looks a little faked. 25 KATHERINE: You're right. It does. 26 CHRISTIANUS: In fact, it reminds me of some of the more funny-looking shots of the alleged Apollo moon landings. 27 KATHERINE: Alleged? 28 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But that is, of course, a 116 Wendy's Risky Role-Play quite complex matter, which we can cover some other time. In any case, as far as the elephants-in-the-river photograph is concerned, we seem to be talking about the same picture, and the same issue. 29 KATHERINE: Perhaps. 30 CHRISTIANUS: So what was the angle? 3 KATHERINE: I am not sure how to describe it. Some elephants are in profile, while others are looking right into the camera. 32 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. But I meant, what's the angle of the story that comes with that photograph? 33 KATHERINE: Ah, the story! 34 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. What was its focus? Its objective? 35 KATHERINE: I think the idea was that ivory poachers are evil. 36 CHRISTIANUS: What else? 37 KATHERINE: What do you mean? Isn't that enough? 38 CHRISTIANUS: What I am looking for is not some intermediary premise or idea, but the final conclusion or call for action, as stated in the article. What was it? I bet it's not that ivory poachers are evil. 39 KATHERINE: Well, I think the conclusion, if you can call it that, was that the project 117Katherine Has a Heart needs its readers' monetary support in order to succeed. So we can save the elephants. Together. 40 CHRISTIANUS: Just what I thought. It's the same old story. How stupid do they think we are? Save the elephants, save the whales, save the atmosphere from carbon dioxide, save the planet! And, not to forget, save us from cancer! Just give us all your money! Ha ha! 4 KATHERINE: Chris, you don't understand. There really are ivory wars down there in Africa. And the article writer - who is a bona fide conservationist, by the way - really tries to understand the situation. To track the elephants, he has even equipped them with radio-transmitting collars. And he has learned a lot from that. So he actually is trying to save the elephants. Don't you get it? v111:139, the conclusion: Katherine's statement about the conclusion seems to be right. But she did not mention that there are actually two articles: one longer article, which is probably the one that she refers to; and then also a shorter one, which mostly consists of photographs and captions. The longer article not only states that 'management must be extended throughout the entire range of the elephants' (Fay and Nichols 2007, p. 65), but also adds, as part of a special 'note to readers', that '[i]nformation networks must be strengthened, and collaboration with Chad's military reinforced. In addition, an airplane is needed for daily surveillance. Turn to page 154 to find out how you can help' (Fay and Nichols 2007, p. 65). And the second article, despite its very limited amount of text, still has room to say, in its final caption: 'Zakouma's future as a wildlife refuge depends on the continuing dedication of its guards-and support from the outside world' (Nichols 2007, p. 77). 118 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 42 CHRISTIANUS: Sure I get it. They are trying to rip you off! 43 KATHERINE: But I have actually read the article, and you haven't. I have seen the picture where the poachers had killed the elephant, leaving him there on the ground with only half a face left. That's what poachers do. It's absolutely horrible! Be human, Chris! 44 CHRISTIANUS: Be human? I am the vegetarian here, not you. I am not killing or eating anything that has, or has had, a head on it, whether it's a fish, a chicken, or a cow. You want to lecture me on love and compassion for animals? I don't even tread on ants, if I can avoid it. 45 KATHERINE: Sorry. But you don't seem to understand the issue. 46 CHRISTIANUS: I think I do. But why don't you tell me, anyway: what is the issue? J. MICHAEL FAY AND MICHAEL NICHOLS (2007), 'Ivory Wars: Last Stand in Zakouma' in National Geographic, March 2007, pp. 34–65. MICHAEL NICHOLS (2007), 'Zakouma: Eye to Eye' in National Geographic, March 2007, pp. 66–77. v111:141, track the elephants: Christianus did not comment specifically on Katherine's deduction, where the premise that the conservationist is tracking the elephants with radiotransmitting collars seemingly leads her to conclude that this would be some kind of proof that 'he actually is trying to save the elephants'. But one could very well imagine that Christianus might say something like this: 'Any object may be tracked for multiple reasons. Maybe the conservationists have pure hearts; but who else has access to that tracking data? Maybe some wellconnected poachers are planning to use that tracking data against the elephants, to capture and kill them?' 119Katherine Has a Heart 47 KATHERINE: The issue is, of course, as I have already said, that we have to save the elephants. 48 CHRISTIANUS: Why? Can't they save themselves? 49 KATHERINE: Save themselves? 50 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Aren't they among the biggest and strongest mammals out there? 5 KATHERINE: Maybe. 120 v111:154, amazingly fast runners: Elephants can run quite quickly when they really have to. Cynthia Moss talks about two types of running: 'floppy' running and 'panic' running. In the 'floppy' variant, 'the elephants put their heads down and let their ears and trunk hang loose so that they flap and wave about as they run', and also 'make the loud, pulsating play trumpet' (Moss 1989, p. 171; cf. Payne 1998, p. 96). This type of running seems to be slower and more relaxed and playful than the other type, which is faster and more 'serious'. For 'panic' running is 'quiet and fast and smooth' (Moss 1989, p. 171). When elephants sense danger, they can run 'fast and silently with no trumpets or screams', and some can do it at least 'for three quarters of a mile before slowing to a walk' (Moss 1989, p. 27). For a photograph of an elephant 'on the charge', see Meredith (2001; plate opposite p. 118); for a black-and-white version, see DouglasHamilton (1992; plate opposite p. 96). IAIN AND ORIA DOUGLAS-HAMILTON (1992), Battle for the Elephants. Edited by Brian Jackman. London: Doubleday. CYNTHIA MOSS (1989), Elephant Memories: Thirteen Years in the Life of an Elephant Family. Glasgow: Fontana/ Collins. MARTIN MEREDITH (2001), Africa's Elephant: A Biography. London: Hodder & Stoughton. Also published (2003) in America (with an updated 'Acknowledgments' section, but otherwise with identical contents and page numbering) as Elephant Destiny: Biography of an Endangered Species in Africa. New York: Public Affairs. KATY PAYNE (1998), Silent Thunder: The Hidden Voice of Elephants. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson. v111:156, elephants . . . in musth: Even though many people reject Charles Darwin's evolutionary theories, it is probably rather uncontroversial to claim that Darwin got it approximately right when he said, 'No animal in the world is so dangerous as an elephant in must[h]' (Darwin 1871, p. 240). This is because of a very heightened level of aggression in those (African) male elephants that periodically experience musth - a Wendy's Risky Role-Play 52 CHRISTIANUS: And one of the most intelligent? 53 KATHERINE: Perhaps. 54 CHRISTIANUS: And amazingly fast runners? 55 KATHERINE: I don't know. 56 CHRISTIANUS: And, in spite of often being portrayed as cute and friendly, aren't elephants, especially when they are in musth, also potentially very dangerous, even to humans? 'state' which also can be identified by, for example, 'the continuous discharge of urine' (Moss 1989, p. 108; ref. supra, note 'amazingly fast runners' at v111:154), 'the swelling of, and copious discharge from, the temporal glands' (Moss 1989, p. 108; for a colour photograph of '[s]wollen temporal glands oozing a thick substance', see DiSilvestro 1991, p. 102) and the 'green penis syndrome' (Moss 1989, pp. 104–108; Poole 1996, pp. 41–46). But what about their consciousness? Are bull elephants in musth (mainly) psychologically focused on mating during those days, weeks, or months that their 'state' lasts (Hollister-Smith 2008, p. 1830)? Or is musth not primarily about mating? Schmidt-Nielsen, for example, claims that '[a] male elephant in \"musth\" . . . is violent and uncontrollable, but he is not in rut (and, although some people think so, musth doesn't mean that he 'must' have a mate)' (SchmidtNielsen 1972, p. 86; my emphasis). However, Hollister-Smith thinks that '[t]he phenomenon of musth in male elephants involves increased sexual activity' (Hollister-Smith 2008, p. 1829). And Ganswindt seems to favour the idea that musth has to do with 'the reproductive context of African elephants' and that musth males are moving long distances 'to locate and associate with oestrus females' (Ganswindt 2004, p. 4) - an idea that seems compatible with Joyce Poole's observations that male elephants in musth exhibited 'a positive association with female groups' and that they 'had higher levels of urinary testosterone and exhibited higher frequencies of aggression than did either sexually inactive or sexually active non-musth males' (Poole 1982, p. ii). CHARLES DARWIN (1871), The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, vol. 11. With illustrations. London: John Murray. ROGER L. DISILVESTRO (1991), The African Elephant: Twilight in Eden. A National Audubon Society Book. Executive editor: Christopher N. Palmer. Photographer: Page Chichester. With a Foreword by Richard E. Leakey and Joyce Poole, and a President's Statement by Peter A. A. Berle. New York: 121Katherine Has a Heart 57 KATHERINE: Dangerous? 58 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Are they not willing to attack and kill people, and eat up all their crops, if they feel so inclined? 59 KATHERINE: Don't ask me. I have never been to Africa. 122 John Wiley & Sons. ANDRÉ GANSWINDT (2004), Endocrine, Physical and Behavioural Correlates of Musth in African Elephants (Loxodonta africana). Göttingen: Cuvillier. JULIE A. HOLLISTER-SMITH, SUSAN C. ALBERTS, AND L. E. L. RASMUSSEN (2008), 'Do Male African Elephants, Loxodonta africana, Signal Musth via Urine Dribbling?' in Animal Behaviour, vol. 76, pp. 1829–1841. JOYCE HATHEWAY POOLE (1982), Musth and Male-Male Competition in the African Elephant. Dissertation submitted to the University of Cambridge for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Sub-department of Animal Behaviour, Madingley, Cambridge. Retrieved from the Elephant Voices website [http://www.elephantvoices.org] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. JOYCE HATHEWAY POOLE (1996), Coming of Age with Elephants. London: Hodder & Stoughton. KNUT SCHMIDT-NIELSEN (1972), How Animals Work. Cambridge: At the University Press. v111:158, attack and kill people: Though (African) elephants often are portrayed as kind and calm animals by various organizations and media in Europe and the U.S., the reality is that they sometimes also are destructive, partly because their fondness of most crops that the Africans produce, and partly because of their huge appetite: each elephant requires 'on average some 330 pounds of food and 21 gallons of water every day' (Sugg and Kreuter 1994, p. 19). It is therefore not very surprising to find that a 1993 survey in Kenya revealed that 97 percent of the farmers in one region 'strongly dislike' elephants, presumably because 229 of the 231 farmers had lost, due to invading elephants, more than half of their crops that season (Sugg and Kreuter 1994, p. 20). As for people getting killed by elephants, there are many reports every year. In Zimbabwe alone, between 1982 and 1989, at least 500 human beings were killed. Zimbabwean newspaper headlines such as these illustrate the extent of it: 'Elephant kills man; Elephant kills woman; Woman killed . . . by an elephant while working in a cotton field on Monday; Jumbos turn on humans as forests vanish; Wild animals \"culling people\" in Binga; 10 year old girl trampled to death by elephant; Plea to help children orphaned by wild animals; Killer Jumbo; Jumbos kill; Elephant kills' (Sugg and Kreuter 1994, p. 21). That elephants very well may exhibit violent behaviour is also illustrated by Joyce Poole, who describes the situWendy's Risky Role-Play 60 CHRISTIANUS: In fact, weren't elephants also used in the Kurukshetra war between the Pândavas and the Kauravas? And in the battles of Alexander the Great and Hannibal? To fight? 6 KATHERINE: I don't know. I'm not a history buff. 123 ation in June of 1992: 'Elephants were on the rampage. They were eating their way through maize shambas, wheat fields, and forest plantations. They were knocking over papaya, coconut, and cashew trees. They were breaking fences, destroying dams, pulling up water pipes, pushing over grain stores and houses. They were preventing small children from going to school, and they were trampling people to death. The reports came in from Kwale, Taita-Taveta, Rombo, and Kimana, from Narok, Nyeri, Laikipia and Rumuruti; they came in from as close to home as Limuru and as far away as Nasolot, Maralel, and Marsabit' (Poole 1996, p. 241; ref. supra, note 'elephants . . . in musth' at v111:156). IKE SUGG AND URS KREUTER (1994), Elephants and Ivory: Lessons from the Trade Ban. IEA Studies on the Environment, no. 2. London: The IEA Environment Unit. v111:160, Kurukshetra: The great war described in the Mahâbhârata - the longest epic in human history with its 100,000 stanzas (Klostermaier 1989, pp. 76-77) - was fought between the Pândavas (Skt. 'the descendants of Pandu'; for a genealogical map of the Pandu lineage, see Narasimhan 1965, p. 218) and the Kauravas (Skt. 'the descendants of Kuru'; for a genealogical map of the Kuru lineage, see Narasimhan 1965, p. 217) at the battlefield of Kurukshetra (Skt. 'the Kuru field'), also called Tâneshar (see al-Bîrûnî 2001, vol. 11, p. 147), a place of pilgrimage (Skt. 'dharmakshetra'; cf. Bhagavad-gîtâ Chapter 1, Text 1; Prabhupâda 1986, pp. 35–37; ref. supra, note 'Vaishya' at v1:17). Kurukshetra is located in Northern India near the ancient city of Hastinâpura (Skt. 'the city of the elephant'), approximately 154 kilometers (96 miles) north of Delhi, and approximately 327 kilometers (203 miles) west-northwest of the camp at Banbasa that the Prince of Wales broke up from in the afternoon of Sunday, 20 February 1876, just before he crossed the Sarda river into Nepalese territory for his two-week Terai tiger experience (cf. supra, note 'Monday' at 111:105). AL-BÎRÛNÎ (2001), Alberuni's India: An account of the religion, philosophy, literature, geography, chronology, astronomy, customs, laws and astrology of India about AD 1030. Edited with Notes and Indices by Edward C. Sachau. Volumes 1 and 11 (bound in one). New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. Original edition (1910): 2 vols. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co. KLAUS K. KLOSTERMAIER (1989), A Survey of Hinduism. Albany, NY: State UniKatherine Has a Heart 62 CHRISTIANUS: But of course, in some of those wars, they were using Indian elephants. But you are most probably talking about the African ones. Aren't you? 63 KATHERINE: Yes. They have the most ivory. 64 CHRISTIANUS: Not necessarily. 124 versity of New York Press. CHAKRAVARTHI V. NARASIMHAN (1965), The Mahâbhârata: An English Version Based on Selected Verses. New York and London: Columbia University Press. v111:160, Alexander the Great: Christianus's statement about the involvement of elephants in the battle(s) of Alexander the Great may be understood in many ways. One way would be to read that statement as a representation of the idea that there were elephants present in the battle(s), but that those elephants not necessarily were on Alexander's side. On such a reading the elephants could have been on Alexander's enemy's side, or on Alexander's own side, or on both sides - a very broad and uncontroversial reading. For it seems firmly established that Alexander on several occasions was involved in battles with his enemy using war elephants. For example, in the battle near the river Jhelum (Lat. Hydaspes), king Porus lined up a number of elephants, which in the estimation of some commentators were 'probably . . . 130 elephants' [apparently from Diodorus of Sicily's Bibliotheca 17.87.2] (Green 1970, p. 214), or somewhere around 85–200 elephants, based on the figures mentioned in Quintus Curtius Rufus's Historiae Alexandri Magni 8.13.6 (85 elephants) and Arrian's Anabasis (History of Alexander) 5.15.4 (200 elephants) (Heckel 2008, p. 161). Another way to read that statement would be to regard it as a representation of the more controversial idea that the elephants necessarily were Alexander's. For in an article on elephants in the Oxford Classical Dictionary Howard Hayes Scullard states, in no uncertain terms, that 'Alexander himself did not try to use elephants for battle, but war elephants were exploited to the full by his successors, particularly the Seleucids and Ptolemies, in their mutual struggles' (Scullard 1970, p. 380). The idea that Alexander did not try to use elephants for battle may have come from Quintus Curtius Rufus, who claimed that Alexander, after the encounter with Porus, in a speech had said that he 'always so little esteemed them' and that he 'would never use them [in battle]' (Kistler 2007, p. 38). But there is still a possibility that Alexander used elephants in battles, or at least planned to do so. For in the estimation of Michael Grant, Quintus Curtius Rufus 'indulges in many sensational distortions and inconsistencies' and 'included fictitious speeches' in his history of Alexander (Grant 1997, p. 103); thus, the idea that Alexander did not have any regard for war elephants may be wrong. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 65 KATHERINE: Aren't the African elephants bigger in size compared to the Indian? 66 CHRISTIANUS: Not all of them. 67 KATHERINE: I am not talking about any baby elephants, Chris! 68 CHRISTIANUS: Neither am I. 125 If so, it would resonate well with Kistler's proposal that Alexander was planning to use elephants all along, acquiring them both before and after the Porus battle: he already had elephants in his army when marching toward India, since one fell victim to 'a large and clever hound for entertainment' (Kistler 2007, p. 38); when 'the troops left Babylon, he could include two dozen pachyderms in the column' (Kistler 2007, p. 38); when he learned that there were thirty elephants grazing every night in the city of Assacenia, 'he paid local \"elephant hunters\" to capture the creatures' (Kistler 2007, p. 38); when Omphis of Taxila surrendered to Alexander, Omphis 'donated eightysix elephants to the growing Macedonian army' (Kistler 2007, p. 39); and after discovering fifteen abandoned elephants near the Indus, and hunting two of them off a cliff, the 'thirteen surviving beasts were incorporated into his [Alexander's] army' (O'Brien 1992, p. 154). Furthermore, even if Quintus Curtius Rufus had relayed Alexander's speech correctly, this would not immediately disprove the thesis that Alexander liked the idea of war elephants, nor the thesis that he had used them, or had planned to use them, in combat. For he might have presented any derogatory statements regarding (the enemy's) war elephants and their capability in an insincere mood, simply for political and military purposes (cf. Heckel 2008, pp. 120–125) - a move that perhaps was intended to motivate his men to keep on fighting under his direction, and to avoid any '[b]itter disillusion' (Hammond 1997, p. 168) that might lead to a mutiny. For against the backdrop of the Jhelum battle, where he and his men only 'narrowly' had defeated Porus's army and its 85–200 elephants (Kistler 2007, p. 40; but cf. Featherstone 1997, p. 183: 'Porus had little chance against Alexander'), how could Alexander otherwise convince his army to face the new threat of four thousand elephants that Xandrames reportedly would mobilize (Kistler 2007, p. 40)? DONALD FEATHERSTONE (1997), Warriors and Warfare in Ancient and Medieval Times. London: Constable. MICHAEL GRANT (1997), Greek and Roman Historians: Information and Misinformation. London and New York: Routledge. PETER GREEN (1970), Alexander the Great. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. N. G. L. HAMMOND (1997), The Genius of Alexander the Great. Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press. WALDEMAR HECKEL (2008), The Conquests of Alexander the Great. Cambridge: Katherine Has a Heart 69 KATHERINE: I don't get it. 70 CHRISTIANUS: There are at least two types of African elephants: the bush elephant and the forest elephant. 7 KATHERINE: And you are saying that one is Cambridge University Press. JOHN M. KISTLER (2007), War Elephants. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press. JOHN MAXWELL O'BRIEN (1992), Alexander the Great: The Invisible Enemy. London and New York: Routledge. HOWARD HAYES SCULLARD (1970), 'Elephants' in N. G. L. Hammond and H. H. Scullard, eds., The Oxford Classical Dictionary. Second edition. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, p. 380. v111:170, types of African elephants: It may be significant that Christianus here uses the word 'types' instead of 'species' or 'subspecies' when he talks about the African bush elephant (Loxodonta africana) and the African forest elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis). For it is possible that he wants to avoid the word 'species', perhaps because he has studied the philosophy of biology and knows that there neither is (or was) any consensus in the academic community on the idea of what 'a species' amounts to, nor on how taxonomy and systematics should deal with that situation (cf. Ereshefsky 2008, Futuyma 1998, Caplan 1998, Sterelny 1998, Simon 1971, Cook 1991a, Cook 1991b). This 'species non-consensus' is practically seen in the (promotional, often pseudo-scientific and evolutionary) material published by some of the international organizations and movements that allegedly are dedicated to some variety of elephant 'conservation': some conclude that the bush elephant is a species under Loxodonta; others say that it is a sub-species. The third edition of Wilson & Reeder's Mammal Species of the World database at the Smithsonian Institution website lists Loxodonta africana and Loxodonta cyclotis as two separate species under the genus Loxodonta (Wilson & Reeder 2012). The IUCN Red List database of threatened species calls Loxodonta cyclotis and Loxodonta africana synonyms (without mentioning the word 'species'), but also notes that 'there may be at least two species of African elephants, namely the Savanna Elephant (Loxodonta africana) and the Forest Elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis)', while also mentioning a third possible species, 'the West African Elephant' (IUCN 2012). And the CITES Species database calls Loxodonta cyclotis and Loxodonta africana synonyms, just as the IUCN Red List database does (and also without mentioning the word 'species') (CITES 2012); but various CITES proposal documents call the bush elephant and the forest elephant 'sub-species' of the species africana, and thus, in effect, categorizing them as Loxodonta africana africana and Loxodonta africana cyclotis (CITES 1989, p. 1a; CITES 1999, p. 2). And even though one document says that the 'pygmy elephant (L. a. 126 Wendy's Risky Role-Play smaller than the other? 72 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 73 KATHERINE: And that the smaller of these is even smaller than the Indian elephant? 74 CHRISTIANUS: That would be the idea. 127 pumilio) is generally not accepted as a valid subspecies' (CITES 1989, p. 1a), its mentioning in a document like this might function as a type of hedging, just in case its status, against all odds, would change in the future; for who can be considered a 'good (animal) ruler' or a 'good (animal) administrator' if one is not capable of (correctly) identifying and categorizing all the different types of animals that participate in the current (taxonomical) 'species' race? For an introductory discussion on the different types of African elephants described in classical literature, see Scullard 1970 (ref. supra, note 'Alexander the Great' at v111:160); for a short overview of some of the differences between Loxodonta cyclotis and Loxodonta africana in terms of their DNA characteristics and their possible 'evolution' or 'development', see Arnold (2006). MICHAEL L. ARNOLD (2006), 'African Elephants' in Evolution Through Genetic Exchange. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 159–160. ARTHUR L. CAPLAN (1998), 'Have Species Become Déclassé?' in Michael Ruse, ed., Philosophy of Biology. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, pp. 156–166. CITES (1989), 'Proposal: Transfer of Loxodonta africana from Appendix 11 to Appendix 1' in Amendments to Appendices 1 and 11 of the Convention: Other Proposals, pp. 1a–10a. Proposal 7.26 [CITES/89/43], submitted by Austria in preparation for CITES CoP7 - the Seventh Meeting of the Conference of the Parties, held in Lausanne, Switzerland, 9–20 October 1989. Document in PDF format retrieved from the CITES website [http://www.cites.org] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. CITES (1999), 'Proposal: Transfer of populations of Loxodonta africana currently listed in Appendix 11 to Appendix 1' in Consideration of Proposals for Amendment of Appendices 1 and 11: Other Proposals, pp. 1–37. Proposal 11.24 (available/amended on 30 November 1999), submitted by Kenya and India in preparation for CITES CoP11 - the Eleventh Meeting of the Conference of the Parties, held in Gigiri, Kenya, 10–20 April 2000. Document in PDF format retrieved from the CITES website [http://www.cites.org] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. CITES (2012), 'Loxodonta africana' in the CITES Species database. Database entry retrieved from the CITES website [http://www.cites.org] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. LAURENCE MARTIN COOK (1991a), 'Methods of Classification' in Genetic and Ecological Diversity: The Sport of Nature. London: Chapman and Hall, pp. 9–18. LAURENCE MARTIN COOK (1991b), 'Definition of Species' in Genetic and Ecological Diversity: The Sport of Nature. Katherine Has a Heart 75 KATHERINE: Is the bush elephant the smaller one? I mean, 'forest' sounds much bigger, right? 76 CHRISTIANUS: It's true that a forest normally is bigger than a bush. But we don't have that type of topographical resemblance naming in this case. 77 KATHERINE: So the forest elephant is the smaller one? Is that what you're saying? 78 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 79 KATHERINE: But then we could at least say that the bush elephants have more ivory than the Indian elephants? 80 CHRISTIANUS: Certainly. And that's not just because some of the bush elephants are bigger in size, and therefore, on average, London: Chapman and Hall, pp. 36–38. MARC ERESHEFSKY (2008), 'Systematics and Taxonomy' in Sahotra Sarkar and Anya Plutynski, eds., A Companion to the Philosophy of Biology. Malden, MA, Oxford, and Carlton, Victoria: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 99–118. DOUGLAS J. FUTUYMA (1998), 'Species' in Evolutionary Biology. Third edition. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, pp. 447–479. IUCN (2012), 'Loxodonta africana' in The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Database entry retrieved from the IUCN Red List website [http://www.iucnredlist. org] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. MICHAEL A. SIMON (1971), 'Presuppositions of Biological Taxonomy' in The Matter of Life: Philosophical Problems of Biology. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press, pp. 171–175. KIM STERELNY (1998), 'Species' in Edward Craig, ed., Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vol. 9 (Sociology of knowledge–Zoroastrianism). London and New York: Routledge, pp. 78–81. DON E. WILSON AND DEEANN M. REEDER, EDS. (2012), 'Loxodonta africana' in Mammal Species of the World. Third edition. Database entry retrieved from (the Vertebrates section of ) the Smithsonian Institution website [http://www.vertebrates.si.edu] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. v111:176, topographical . . . naming: Christianus seems to be saying that the 128 Wendy's Risky Role-Play have bigger tusks. 8 KATHERINE: It isn't? 82 CHRISTIANUS: No. It's also because the female Indian elephants, along with some of the males, don't have tusks. 83 KATHERINE: I am sorry? 84 CHRISTIANUS: Amongst the Indian elephants, only some of the males have tusks. So if you are worried about ivory poachers and the Indian elephants, you can basically zoom in on the males only. 85 KATHERINE: Hmmm. I haven't thought so much about the Indian elephants. 86 CHRISTIANUS: Why not? 87 KATHERINE: Well, the article didn't mention 129 names of the two types of African elephants have not been given because they visually resemble a forest or a bush. v111:184, ivory poachers: Mark Shand notes that the Asian elephant does not suffer as much from poaching as the African elephant does, for 'only certain males carry ivory' (Shand 1995, p. 5; ref. supra, note 'No women?' at 111:88). This is confirmed by Eric Scigliano: 'only Asian males, and not all of them, grow tusks' (Scigliano 2004, p. 5). But even if it is true that the Asian elephant suffers less from poaching than the African elephant does, there are other threats, one of which is the loss of habitat. For according to Shand, '[i]t is the loss of natural habitat on a vast scale, due to the massive increase in population, that is pushing the elephant towards extinction in Asia' (Shand 1995, p. 5). And a similar situation is to be found in Africa. Robin Brown estimates that most of the severe loss of elephants in West African countries 'can be blamed on habitat competition with humans' (Brown 2008, p. 192). ROBIN BROWN (2008), Blood Ivory: The Massacre of the African Elephant. Foreword by Carl G. Jones. Stroud: The History Press. ERIC SCIGLIANO (2004), Love, War & Circuses: The Age-Old Relationship Between Elephants and Humans. London: Bloomsbury. Katherine Has a Heart them. 88 CHRISTIANUS: So if one article doesn't mention them, you don't do any more research? 89 KATHERINE: As you know, I am a very busy lawyer. And I normally need all the time in the world just to stay on top of all my cases. 90 CHRISTIANUS: But you are not at work now. You're in London. 9 KATHERINE: True. But I came here to relax, not to start any investigations. I mean, I haven't even dealt with my own luggage problem yet. 92 CHRISTIANUS: Fair enough. But when will you do all that elephant research then? 93 KATHERINE: I am not sure. I read that article only yesterday. 94 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. 95 KATHERINE: And I'm not sure I want to, either. 96 CHRISTIANUS: So you're saying that you are giving up the whole thing? That you no longer are in favour of 'saving' the African elephants? 97 KATHERINE: Are you kidding? Sure I am. 98 CHRISTIANUS: You are? 99 KATHERINE: I have a heart. 130 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 200 CHRISTIANUS: That's great. Now we only have to detect some brain tissue somewhere. 20 KATHERINE: Chris. Be nice. Be human! 131Katherine Has a Heart SCENE IX. Elephant Friends Forever  CHRISTIANUS: So you still want to save the African elephants? 2 KATHERINE: Yes. 3 CHRISTIANUS: Even though you haven't read all the research reports? 4 KATHERINE: Yes. 5 CHRISTIANUS: And even though you don't know exactly what your potential 'help' organization is up to? 6 KATHERINE: Is up to? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. What people are up to is very often a function of what their beliefs and values amount to. 8 KATHERINE: OK? 9 CHRISTIANUS: So if you have an organization called, say, 'Elephant Friends Forever', you need to investigate it. 0 KATHERINE: Well . . .  CHRISTIANUS: What beliefs and values do 1x:19, some sources: One cannot count on that Christianus is fully serious here. It may be that he is simply bluffing, in order to 'control' Katherine. Nevertheless, there are some sources that one might use to corroborate Christianus's idea that the number of African elephants is, or has their employees have? What silly salaries and porky perks do they get? And which external people, organizations, companies, institutions, and think tanks do they support? 2 KATHERINE: Sure, but . . . 3 CHRISTIANUS: And who controls EFF? Who started it, and owned it, and co-opted it, either officially or covertly? And which other organizations, companies, institutions, and think tanks are supporting it, ideologically, politically, and monetarily? 4 KATHERINE: Chris, this is too . . . 5 CHRISTIANUS: And what about the fact that the African elephants are actually increasing in numbers? While the Indian elephants are decreasing in numbers? 6 KATHERINE: What? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it seems that the longterm trend is that there are more and more African elephants, but less and less Indian. 8 KATHERINE: Really? 9 CHRISTIANUS: At least according to some sources. 133 been, increasing: Shand claims that 'it is doubtful if as many as fifty thousand elephants survive in the wild in the whole of Asia, compared with Africa's growing population of over half a million' (Shand 1995, p. 5; ref. supra, note 'No women?' at 111:88). And the 1991 reports by Ricciuti and DouglasElephant Friends Forever 20 KATHERINE: But that's not the impression I got! 2 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. Maybe you just read the article too quickly? 22 KATHERINE: No, I don't think so. I clearly remember they said they found fewer elephants this year than the year before. 23 CHRISTIANUS: Well, even if that were true, what difference would it make? 24 KATHERINE: How do you mean? 25 CHRISTIANUS: It's just one year's data. To identify longer trends, you have to observe many years' data, collected by multiple independent research organizations, preferably without any political affiliations. And the long-term trend seems to be that the number of African elephants is increasing. Hamilton noted an increasing number of elephants in Kenya, as discussed by Sugg and Kreuter (1994, pp. 41–42; ref. supra, note 'attack and kill people' at v111:158). 1x:21, read . . . too quickly: Though Christianus has not yet read that article in the March 2007 issue of National Geographic, his idea (that Katherine may have skipped or skimmed parts of that article) is not unrealistic. For according to one passage, the elephant population in Zakouma increased: 'At that time [in 1969], buffalo were almost extinct in the [Zakouma National] park, and there were about a thousand elephants. There are now 6,500 buffalo, and elephant numbers have steadily increased since the ban on international ivory trade in 1989, reaching 3,885 in 2005' (Fay and Nichols 2007, p. 54; ref. supra, note 'the conclusion' at v111:139). 1x:22, fewer elephants this year: It is correct, as Katherine states, that Fay and Nichols wrote that they had found fewer elephants 'this year' than 'last year': 'The final elephant count was 127 herds, with a total of 3,020 animals, almost 900 short of last year' (Fay and Nichols 2007, p. 54; ref. supra, note 'the conclusion' at v111:139). Note, however, that the expression 'last 134 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 26 KATHERINE: Hmmm. I'm not so sure . . . 27 CHRISTIANUS: In other words, the newly reported short-term trend seems to go against the long-term trend. So how can it be trusted, without any further investigation? Where is the satisfaction? 28 KATHERINE: What are you saying? 29 CHRISTIANUS: Counting African elephants is difficult. So maybe these researchers made a mistake, or many? Perhaps they didn't take into consideration that some elephants went off to some other part of Africa? Or maybe the elephants were hiding during those days when they were counted? Or perhaps the researchers just missed them anyway, even if they weren't hiding? And what if the researchers falsi135 year' presumably should be understood as the year of 2005. For the expedition reached Africa on 23 March 2006, and it seems as if the article manuscript was finished before the end of that year. Therefore, the 'now' of the article would translate to 2006, while 'last year' would refer to 2005. 1x:29, Counting African elephants: It is not an easy task to count elephants, whether one does it from the ground, or uses some aerial method (DouglasHamilton 1992, p. 178; ref. supra, note 'amazingly fast runners' at v111:154). Fay and Nichols, for example, reported some potential counting problems: 'Luis was perplexed. Had we missed a large herd, or had we double-counted a herd in 2005?' (Fay and Nichols 2007, p. 54; ref. supra, note 'the conclusion' at v111:139). And when the elephants are in the forests in west and central Africa, whether they are there because they are consciously hiding or not, it gets even more difficult. For at that time 'it is impossible to count elephants directly' (Kangwana 1996, p. 20); therefore one has to resort to some type of indirect counting, using, for instance, the method of 'dung counting'. KADZO KANGWANA, ED. (1996), Studying Elephants. Nairobi, Kenya: African Wildlife Foundation. Elephant Friends Forever fied their data, to create a problem, so that they later could ask for research grants to 'solve' it? It's certainly not unheard of. 30 KATHERINE: Come on, Chris! 3 CHRISTIANUS: Or perhaps these researchers didn't make a mistake or fake their data. Maybe it's the other researchers, who previously reported an increasing population, that are wrong, or are faking the data. 32 KATHERINE: Yes, yes! Right! 33 CHRISTIANUS: Or maybe the new and old reports are not comparable. Perhaps all researchers are right in some sense, and wrong in some other. Maybe their investigations are overlapping in some respects, but not in others. Or maybe they all fudge their data. Who knows? 34 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 35 CHRISTIANUS: Therefore, without an elephantic amount of your own money, time, and resources, you will never truly know the exact state of affairs. So why engage yourself in it? 36 KATHERINE: What do you mean? Why engage . . . ? 37 CHRISTIANUS: Surely you must know that whenever and wherever there is money at stake, one has to be very careful. I hope you have understood at least that? 136 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 38 KATHERINE: I don't care so much about the money. I have enough. I just want to save the elephants. 39 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I am not actually talking about the money, Katherine. Or about the elephants. I am talking about satisfaction. In general. 40 KATHERINE: What does that even mean? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Well, you can't buy real satisfaction. 42 KATHERINE: I wasn't trying to. I was just trying to save the elephants. 43 CHRISTIANUS: No. You were trying to buy some cheap, shrink-wrapped antidote for your guilt. That's all. 44 KATHERINE: Chris, I don't like your tone. 45 CHRISTIANUS: You don't have to like it, Katherine. I am telling you like it is. Or as I see it. You need to start taking responsibility for your own life and your actions. 46 KATHERINE: I thought that was exactly what I did when I decided to save the elephants. 47 CHRISTIANUS: The idea to save the elephants is not a bad one, assuming that they need to be saved, and can be saved. And assuming that it will be possible for you not only to verify that they were saved, if that ever happens, but also to verify 137Elephant Friends Forever that that particular state of affairs was achieved solely, or at least partly, by the efforts of the very same organization that you supported. And also assuming, of course, that you can be perfectly sure that no innocent men, animals, or environment got harmed, killed, destroyed, or polluted along the way, either in Africa or anywhere else. 48 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 49 CHRISTIANUS: So if, for example, it turns out that some elephants were not saved, or someone got harmed, or something got polluted, along the way, you should request your money back. And perhaps even sue them. 50 KATHERINE: Are you kidding? 5 CHRISTIANUS: No. This is big business. 52 KATHERINE: So I have to check the organization first? 53 CHRISTIANUS: As always. Everyone in it, and around it, whether visible or hidden. 54 KATHERINE: But if I have to check and double-check everything and everyone all the time, when would I have time to do my real work, as a lawyer? 55 CHRISTIANUS: Precisely. So if you want to continue as a lawyer, then your best bet is simply to keep your money to yourself. 138 Wendy's Risky Role-Play That way you can be sure that you do not support any potential criminals. Assuming, of course, that none of your clients are criminals, or so inclined. 56 KATHERINE: But I want to save the elephants! 57 CHRISTIANUS: Then why not just go to Africa, yourself? 58 KATHERINE: When would I have the time? I am working almost twenty-four seven. 59 CHRISTIANUS: Take a year off. 60 KATHERINE: Are you nuts? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Perhaps. But if you are really concerned about the elephants, you should go to Africa. That's the only way to verify that you actually are saving the elephants. 62 KATHERINE: But I am not that concerned. 63 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, that's the problem. In fact, you are not really concerned about anything. Except your job, of course. 64 KATHERINE: Well . . . 65 CHRISTIANUS: And that's a problem. Unless, of course, you are completely satisfied with your job. 66 KATHERINE: You know very well that I am not. 67 CHRISTIANUS: So do something about it! 68 KATHERINE: But my job is all I've got. What can I do? 139Elephant Friends Forever 69 CHRISTIANUS: You could start by prioritizing your satisfaction, instead of so easily accepting being a mind-slave to the establishment. 70 KATHERINE: What the hell are you talking about now? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Why should you work at all, if you already have all the money you need? Who else but a fool would do that? 72 KATHERINE: Because that's what people do in America. We are not a bunch of lazy European armchair philosophers. We are hard workers! 73 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! That's exactly what I mean. Brainwashed into accepting being a slave. No wonder you are so miserable. You watch w-a-y too much Law & Order! Talk about bad programming! 74 KATHERINE: I don't watch that much television. 75 CHRISTIANUS: Perhaps not compared to other Americans. But it's still a few hours a day, isn't it? 76 KATHERINE: Maybe. 77 CHRISTIANUS: And you use it to escape from your gloomy job? 78 KATHERINE: No, it's not like that. I like my job. To a certain extent. At least some days. 79 CHRISTIANUS: But you are not satisfied, are you? 140 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 80 KATHERINE: No. 8 CHRISTIANUS: So you need to do something about it. 82 KATHERINE: You mean quit? 83 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 84 KATHERINE: Why? 85 CHRISTIANUS: Well, if you haven't been able to detect any substantial satisfaction after all these years, why continue? I mean, if satisfaction is what you want? 86 KATHERINE: But quit my job? 87 CHRISTIANUS: If you cannot do it immediately, do it gradually. That will give you more and more time to prepare yourself. 88 KATHERINE: For what? 89 CHRISTIANUS: For the ride of your life. 90 KATHERINE: Meaning? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Satisfaction. 92 KATHERINE: Yes, I got that. But what does it mean? 93 CHRISTIANUS: It involves the idea of the direct and honest empirical evaluation of all things connected to your existential situation. And then, as you discover new things, you simply adjust your own beliefs, values, and behaviour accordingly. 94 KATHERINE: But I don't want to do that. 141Elephant Friends Forever 95 CHRISTIANUS: Do what? 96 KATHERINE: Change my life. Or my behaviour. At least not very much. 97 CHRISTIANUS: I know, I know. It is tough to get out of the rat rut, especially if one has to do it voluntarily. It would be easier for you if someone just fired you. But that's not possible in your case, of course. 98 KATHERINE: No. I am my own boss. 99 CHRISTIANUS: Right. And you also want to be successful, I take it? 00 KATHERINE: Sure. Doesn't everyone? Isn't it OK to make money? 0 CHRISTIANUS: It depends. Some people do not want to make money. 02 KATHERINE: Why? 03 CHRISTIANUS: Well, some claim it destroys their character. But others simply say that they have better things to do. 04 KATHERINE: Are they satisfactionists? 05 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, some of them. They know that they cannot bring with them anything material to the next life. So why work so hard? 1x:114, Knaus Berry Farm: The Knaus Berry Farm [http://www.knausberryfarm.com] is a popular place, located in Homestead, Florida, just south of Miami. Over 50 years ago this familyowned farm began its operation by selling 142 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 06 KATHERINE: Lazy bums! 07 CHRISTIANUS: So instead of watching so much telly, they lead a more down-to-earth kind of life, in a small, simple home, in a small, simple village. Where they prepare nice home-made meals with organic, non-GMO vegetables and grains from their local farmer. And where they engage in different spiritually uplifting activities, trying to satisfy both their own souls and others'. 08 KATHERINE: That sounds really unattractive. 09 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, it might not sound very sexy at first. But how else are you going to prepare yourself for the next life? By buying things? And property? 0 KATHERINE: The next life? Why waste time worrying about something like that? I want to have a nice time now!  CHRISTIANUS: Yes, that's the usual attitude. Most people think they need immediate sense gratification, all the time. 2 KATHERINE: It's the American way. 3 CHRISTIANUS: It sure is. 4 KATHERINE: Like one of those Knaus Berry 143 strawberries. Nowadays they also offer assorted baked goods, jams, vegetables, milk shakes, and ice cream. The farm is open all days except Sundays during the Redland farming season of Miami-Dade County (November through mid-April). Elephant Friends Forever Farm shakes. Or an ice-cold Coke. With lots of sugar. Aaahhh! 144 Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE X. Incommensurability  CHRISTIANUS: Actually, sugar is an interesting topic. It fits well with your current situation. 2 KATHERINE: How so? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Well, sugar can be exhilarating, just like a successful law practise can be when all the money rolls in. So whether one is engaged in chewing or suing, it may be hard to stop. 4 KATHERINE: Right. If one wants to stop, that is. 5 CHRISTIANUS: Exactly. Therefore we also have to understand that such sweetness, as well as the activities preceding it, may be counterproductive. 6 KATHERINE: Counterproductive? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, especially if one is a satisfactionist and see things differently. 8 KATHERINE: But I am not. And even if sugar won't give me 'everlasting satisfaction' or anything of the sort, it still gives me something positive that I can enjoy here and now. 9 CHRISTIANUS: Until you get that negative toothache, of course. 0 KATHERINE: Ouch! Don't talk about it!  CHRISTIANUS: Or become so fat that no-one wants to date you. 2 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 3 CHRISTIANUS: Or even wants to hire you as a lawyer. How about that, Miss LitiGator? 4 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 5 CHRISTIANUS: Listen, Katherine. Sugar isn't good for the system, in the long run. That's why a satisfactionist must skip it. It's part of the training. Especially if one is overweight, like you. 6 KATHERINE: Sounds terrible. I could never do it. Ever! 7 CHRISTIANUS: Sure you could. 8 KATHERINE: No. I have such a sweet tooth. 9 CHRISTIANUS: I had too. 20 KATHERINE: Really? x:25, maybe . . . incommensurability: When Christianus talks about 'incommensurability' he is most probably not just talking about some Kuhnian-like concept dealing with a 'crisis' and a breakdown of a 'paradigm' in the history of science (Kuhn 1977, pp. xxii, 206–209; Shapere 1998, HoyningenHuene 1996) or about ancient Greek mathematical concepts such as the diagonal of a square and the 'irrationality' of √2 as found in some Pythagorean-like arithmetic (Heath 1981, pp. 65, 90–91; Burnet 1948, p. 105), but rather about something more general, though, perhaps, it also may involve 146 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 2 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Until I discovered that I could control it. 22 KATHERINE: How? 23 CHRISTIANUS: I started experimenting with opposites. 24 KATHERINE: Opposites? 25 CHRISTIANUS: Well, maybe I should call it incommensurability instead. 26 KATHERINE: What's that? 27 CHRISTIANUS: It's the idea that certain things are incompatible with each other. In a certain way. 28 KATHERINE: What things? 29 CHRISTIANUS: I'll give you an example. 30 KATHERINE: OK. 3 CHRISTIANUS: One evening, many moons ago, one of my neighbours upstairs had a party. 32 KATHERINE: How was it? 33 CHRISTIANUS: I am not sure. 147 some aspects of the basic ideas discussed in these two types of 'incommensurability' that modern philosophers often want to talk about. Furthermore, it is probably significant that Christianus here appears to be saying that 'incommensurability' is almost like opposites, but not quite. So even though 'incommensurability' sometimes may include some sense of 'oppositeness', there could be other times when it may not. One example might be complementary colours: although two colours on the colour wheel might be positioned exactly opposite each other, a person with full colour vision and some Incommensurability 34 KATHERINE: Too many drinks to remember? 35 CHRISTIANUS: No. Of course not. 36 KATHERINE: Why are you not sure, then? 37 CHRISTIANUS: Because I wasn't there. 38 KATHERINE: You weren't there? 39 CHRISTIANUS: No. 40 KATHERINE: So where were you? Yachting in the Mediterranean? Climbing K2? Or guest lecturing on Surf Philosophy at the University of Hawaii? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! No. I was just downstairs, in my own apartment. Taking it easy. 42 KATHERINE: How come? I mean, if there is a party! 43 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. But I wasn't invited. 44 KATHERINE: Since when would that stop you? 45 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, you're right. But it's complicated. 46 KATHERINE: Complicated? This sounds interesting! artistic sensibilities would seldom experience any (aesthetic) 'incommensurability' between such 'opposite' colours, but rather a very striking compatibility and complementariness. JOHN BURNET (1948), Early Greek Philosophy. London: Adam & Charles Black. THOMAS HEATH (1981), '111. Pythagorean Arithmetic' in A History of Greek Mathematics, vol. 1: From Thales to Euclid. New York: Dover Publications, pp. 65–117. PAUL HOYNINGEN-HUENE (1996), 'Kuhn, Thomas' in Donald M. Borchert, ed., The Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Supplement. New York: Macmillan Reference and 148 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 47 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But all I can say right now is that I don't know very much about the party. Just some details. 48 KATHERINE: All right. 49 CHRISTIANUS: And maybe you, as a lawyer, might even agree that knowing less details about a certain subject might actually be better than knowing too much, at least in some situations? 50 KATHERINE: Sure. But why don't you try that on some of your professor friends, and see what they say! 5 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Right! 52 KATHERINE: So what do you know about the party? 53 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I know that I heard a lot. 54 KATHERINE: Music? 55 CHRISTIANUS: Some would call it that. 56 KATHERINE: What kind? 57 CHRISTIANUS: The loud kind. 58 KATHERINE: Any particular songs? 149 London: Simon & Schuster and Prentice Hall International, pp. 285–286. THOMAS S. KUHN (1977), The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and Change. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. DUDLEY SHAPERE (1998), 'Incommensurability' in Edward Craig, ed., Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vol. 4 (Genealogy–Iqbal). London and New York: Routledge, pp. 732–736. x:35, Of course not: It is unclear what Christianus is saying here. Is he saying that he never drinks, or that he only drinks very little, at (some) parties? Or is Incommensurability 59 CHRISTIANUS: Mostly Wendy's favourite. 60 KATHERINE: Wendy? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. You just met her. 62 KATHERINE: The waitress? 63 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 64 KATHERINE: She was there? 65 CHRISTIANUS: Of course. She lives there. 66 KATHERINE: So close? 67 CHRISTIANUS: It used to be even closer. But that's another story. 68 KATHERINE: Hmmm. So what song was it? 69 CHRISTIANUS: It was one of those popular American uptempo pop-rock songs. 70 KATHERINE: Oh, that one! 7 CHRISTIANUS: But there was also something quite British about it. 72 KATHERINE: As long as it wasn't Scottish! 73 CHRISTIANUS: It wasn't. I don't think. he saying 'Of course not' simply because he wasn't at any party? Maybe one of his principles is that he doesn't consume alcohol unless he is at a party, or is in the company of others, possibly as a way to limit his own consumption? x:76, thousands of songs: Although it may be difficult to understand exactly how Katherine would know such a thing (unless one of her legal cases involved Billboard or the music industry), she does seem to have a point here. Currently (Tuesday, 3 April 2012) there are many different lists on Billboard's free website [http://www.billboard.com], and even more lists on their professional website [http://www.billboard.biz]. Excluding the lists of artists and albums as well as the lists of the relative ranking 150 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 74 KATHERINE: Did it have a name? 75 CHRISTIANUS: I am sure it did. I just can't remember it. But it definitely was on last year's Billboard list. 76 KATHERINE: Great work, Sherlock! Billboard only lists thousands of songs a year. 77 CHRISTIANUS: I hear you. But it's not really a problem. 78 KATHERINE: Why not? 79 CHRISTIANUS: We'll just ask Wendy when she returns. She knows everything about that song. So unless she has acute amnesia, or for some reason is unwilling to revisit her personal pop-rock memory bank, we will soon know all the details. 80 KATHERINE: All right. 8 CHRISTIANUS: So back to the party. 82 KATHERINE: Sure. 83 CHRISTIANUS: Or, rather, to the time just before the party. 151 between the different charts themselves, there were, on their free website, 35 lists of songs in five categories, containing a total of 1,255 songs (some of which were duplicates, though), representing just one week's state of affairs. In category 'Overall Popularity': Hot 100 (100), Billboard 200 (200), Radio Songs (40), [Hot] Digital Songs (40), Ringtones (20), Social 50 (50), Uncharted (50); in category 'Breaking & Entering': Heatseekers Songs (15); in category 'Genres': Pop Songs (20), Adult Contemporary [Recurrents] (15), Adult Pop Songs (20), Dance/Club Play Songs (25), R&B/ Hip-Hop Songs (50), Rap Songs (15), Rock Songs (25), Alternative Songs (20), Country Songs (30), Jazz Songs (15), Latin Songs (25), Regional Mexican Songs (20), Latin Pop Songs (20), TropiIncommensurability 84 KATHERINE: OK. What happened? 85 CHRISTIANUS: Well, everything was very quiet at the time. 86 KATHERINE: Good. 87 CHRISTIANUS: So I thought I would listen to eine kleine Baaachische foooge. 88 KATHERINE: Bach? 89 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But then I suddenly tripped over some annoying golden-braided book lying in my dangerously high Fahrenheit 451 fireplace pile. cal Songs (20), Christian Songs (25), Gospel Songs (15), Holiday Airplay (25), Holiday Songs (25); in category 'International': Japan Hot 100 (50), Korea K-Pop Hot 100 (50), United Kingdom Songs (10), Germany Songs (10), Canadian Hot 100 (50); in category 'Web': YouTube (25), Yahoo Video (10), Yahoo Audio (10), MySpace Songs (15). x:87, eine kleine: This grouping of words may or may not be significant. Perhaps Christianus simply thought these words sounded good together, or just uttered them because they came up in his mind. Or it might be that he already here prepares for the transition to another composer (by signalling 'Eine Kleine Nachtmusik'). Such a transition would work well also in a temporal sense (cf. infra, note 'Jupiter' at x:100). x:87, Baaachische foooge: It is hard to say whether or not this utterance is an attempt of Christianus to demonstrate his knowledge of German musical history. But we can at least be relatively sure that it is an attempt to sound German. For it seems rather likely that these (exaggerated) words have their origin in the German expression 'Bachische fuge', which in English may be rendered as 'Bachian fugue'. x:89, dangerously high: What is the 'danger' in 'dangerously high' referring to here? We know that Christianus tripped; but we don't know whether or not the potential danger was about tripping, or about something else. If the potential danger was about tripping, then we might understand 'dangerously high' as not very high at all: just one very thick golden-braided book lying on the floor would theoretically be enough. But if the potential danger was about, for example, that the pile might fall into Christianus's fireplace (if he has a fireplace), then one might estimate that the potential danger would increase with the height of the pile. 152 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 90 KATHERINE: Shocking! Whatever you're talking about. 9 CHRISTIANUS: Well, all right. Maybe not so shocking. But I still took it as a sure sign that I should do something more significant. 92 KATHERINE: More significant than what? Tripping over it? 93 CHRISTIANUS: That too. 94 KATHERINE: So? 95 CHRISTIANUS: So I picked Mozart instead. 153 And in this second interpretation we may also note - in the case of him having a fireplace, and books dangerously close to it - that it seems to indicate that he would have some potential floor space around the fireplace. Therefore, it is not impossible that Christianus's living-room arrangement rather resembles, say, Derek Patmore's more open and 'spacy' fireplace style (Patmore 1938, Plate 1, p. 31) than the more crowded style of Hayes Marshall (Patmore 1938, Plate 2, p. 32). DEREK PATMORE (1938), Decoration for the Small Home. London: Putnam. x:89, golden-braided book: A Google search for 'golden-braided book' returns, as usual, too many results. But out of the ten results appearing on the first page - in a search where Google [http://www.google.com] also decided, without being instructed to do so, not to use the search term 'golden-braided' but the shorter 'golden-braid'- there is only one book that seems to fit the general context in which Christianus is operating; and that book appears in four of those results. And when we learn that the title of that book also includes the word 'Bach', we can be reasonably sure that Christianus most probably is talking about Hofstadter's book Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid (Hofstadter 1979). DOUGLAS R. HOFSTADTER (1979), Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. London: Penguin Books. x:89, Fahrenheit 451 fireplace pile: What kind of pile is this? Should we think of it as a heap of books that includes Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 and perhaps other books related to it, being located near the fireplace only because Christianus usually sits there when he reads (if Christianus has a fireplace, and if he usually sits there and reads)? Or should we think of it more as a collection of books that has something Incommensurability 96 KATHERINE: Any particular work? 97 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it was Thor's day. 98 KATHERINE: You mean it was Thursday? 99 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. So it had to be Symphony number 4. 00 KATHERINE: Jupiter? 0 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Good! In C Major. By the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, conducted by Sir Charles Mackerras. 02 KATHERINE: You remembered all that? 03 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 04 KATHERINE: Spooky! 05 CHRISTIANUS: Spooky? 06 KATHERINE: The Scots, remember? 07 CHRISTIANUS: Oh, right! 08 KATHERINE: But what does Thursday have to do with Symphony number 4? 09 CHRISTIANUS: Nothing. 0 KATHERINE: Nothing?  CHRISTIANUS: Well, nothing directly. There's to do with the business of one of Fahrenheit 451's German-sounding, Moonday-named characters, who, at least in the beginning of that book, thought that '[i]t was a pleasure to burn' (Bradbury 1985, p. 3)? RAY BRADBURY (1985), Fahrenheit 451. London: Collins Educational. x:100, Jupiter: The artistic freedom that came with the personal initiative to write Symphony 41 in C Major (K551) - as opposed to it being commissioned - may partly explain why this work was named 'Jupiter' (Glover 2005, p. 161). But Mozart himself did not name it that way; instead it was (allegedly) assigned 154 Wendy's Risky Role-Play another connexion. 2 KATHERINE: OK? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Thor's day is also Jupiter's day. 4 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. 155 to that work by Johann Peter Salomon, the man who organized Haydn's concerts in London (Wilson 2003, p. 81; cf. Westrup 1970, p. 89) and who also once offered Mozart an opportunity there (Sadie 1982, p. 138). JANE GLOVER (2005), Mozart's Women. London: Macmillan. STANLEY SADIE (1982), The New Grove Mozart. London: Macmillan/Papermac. JACK WESTRUP (1970), An Introduction to Musical History. London: Hutchinson University Library. CONRAD WILSON (2003), Notes on Mozart: 20 Crucial Works. Edinburgh: Saint Andrew Press. Incommensurability SCENE XI. The Fat Rat  CHRISTIANUS: But just when I was going to play the CD, I remembered the UPS guy. 2 KATHERINE: Which one? 3 CHRISTIANUS: The one who, a few hours earlier, rang my door bell just when I was about to play one of my other CDs. 4 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. 5 CHRISTIANUS: And who delivered a package which I, at the time, didn't open. 6 KATHERINE: Why not? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Because I suddenly realized that I had a meeting, elsewhere. So I had to run. 8 KATHERINE: What was in the package? 9 CHRISTIANUS: It should have been a bunch of Mozart books. 0 KATHERINE: Was it? x1:21, Mozart was a freemason: Mozart was 'a leading Mason' (Landon 1989, p. 229) and a member of a lodge in Vienna with the innocent-sounding name 'Zur Wohltätigkeit' (Glover 2005, p. 147; ref. supra, note 'Jupiter' at x:100), literally 'To (the) Charity' or 'For (the) Benevolence' (cf. Springer 1975, p. 1817). He was initiated on 14 December 1784 (Nettl 1957, p. 15). But Mozart also visited some of the other lodges in Vienna, which in 1784 were seven in number  CHRISTIANUS: That was the question. So a few hours later, when I was back home again, and ready to play the Mozart CD, I first had to open the package and check. 2 KATHERINE: And? 3 CHRISTIANUS: It turned out that all the volumes were there. And they were much better than I thought they would be! 4 KATHERINE: Good! 5 CHRISTIANUS: So then I thought it would be neat to do some improvised research before I would listen to the CD. To see what interesting historic information I could find about 'Jupiter' and about Mozart in general. To put things in perspective. 6 KATHERINE: Right. 7 CHRISTIANUS: But then I made a disappointing discovery. 8 KATHERINE: Yes? 9 CHRISTIANUS: I found a materialist. 20 KATHERINE: I'm sorry? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Mozart was a freemason. 157 (Gould 1887, p. 287); and recommended by his 'home lodge', Mozart received his second degree on 7 January 1785 in a ceremony at the 343rd meeting of the lodge called 'Zur wahren Eintracht' (Nettl 1957, p. 15), literally 'To (the) True Harmony' or 'To (the) True Union' (cf. Springer 1974, p. 465). Shortly thereafter, Mozart's father Leopold also joined 'Zur Wohltätigkeit': he received his initiation on 6 April 1875, his second degree on 16 April 1875, and the third The Fat Rat 22 KATHERINE: Really? 23 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And since I don't want to associate with any 'Brothers' or any demoniac, materialistic vibrations, I immediately bagged him, the CD, and all my new books, once and for all. 24 KATHERINE: You're kidding? 25 CHRISTIANUS: No. 26 KATHERINE: So you decided not to play anything? 27 CHRISTIANUS: No. I decided to play some devotional Govinda music instead. In C Major. 28 KATHERINE: How do you know that that composer isn't a freemason? 29 CHRISTIANUS: Because I am the composer and the performer. And I am not a 'Brother'. degree on 22 April 1875 (Nettl 1957, p. 16; cf. Glover 2005, p. 147). A contemporary painting (allegedly) depicts Mozart seated at one of the freemason lodges, where an initiation ceremony is held, with Prince Nicolaus Esterházy officiating (reproduced in colour in Mozart 1990, p. 206). Mozart's involvement with freemasonry is also easy to see in his output. In his correspondence he uses phrases like 'Brother of the Order' or 'B.O.' or 'Brother' when addressing fellow freemasons such as Michael Puchberg (Mozart 1990, pp. 206–209). And his musical works have many connexions with freemasonry: his cantata Die Maurerfreunde (K471) was composed to his freemason lodge (Glover 2005, p. 147); and his Zauberflöte (K620) is replete with freemasonry symbolism (cf. Jahn 1891, p. 369). ROBERT FREKE GOULD (1887), History of Freemasonry: Its Antiquities, Symbols, Constitutions, Customs, Etc., vol. 6. Embracing an Investigation of the Records of the Organisations of the Fraternity in England, Scotland, Ireland, British Colonies, France, Germany, and the United States. Derived from Official Sources. London: Thomas C. Jack. 158 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 30 KATHERINE: OK, I see. 3 CHRISTIANUS: So it's my own consciousness and vibratory state that comes back at me, and no one else's. 32 KATHERINE: Sounds reasonable. 33 CHRISTIANUS: So then I turned up the volume, so I could hear all the details. 34 KATHERINE: Sorry to interrupt, but do you still have those nice JBL studio monitors that you picked up in Miami with me? 35 CHRISTIANUS: Certainly. They sound just as good as they always did. And they are just as ugly. 36 KATHERINE: Which is why you got them so cheap! 37 CHRISTIANUS: Precisely. Just my style! 38 KATHERINE: Absolutely! So you turned up the 159 OTTO JAHN (1891), Life of Mozart, vol. 3. Translated from the German by Pauline D. Townsend. With a Preface by George Grove. London: Novello, Ewer & Co. H. C. ROBBINS LANDON (1989), Mozart: The Golden Years 1781–1791. With 215 illustrations, 32 in colour. London: Thames and Hudson. WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART (1990), Mozart's Letters: An Illustrated Selection. Translated by Emily Anderson. London: Barrie and Jenkins. PAUL NETTL (1957), Mozart and Masonry. New York: Philosophical Library. OTTO SPRINGER, ED. (1974), Langenscheidt's Encyclopaedic Dictionary of the English and German languages. Part 11 (German-English), vol. 1 (A–K). Based on the original work by E. Muret and D. Sanders. Completely revised 1974. Berlin, Munich, Vienna, Zurich: Langenscheidt. OTTO SPRINGER, ED. (1975), Langenscheidt's Encyclopaedic Dictionary of the English and German languages. Part 11 (German-English), vol. 2 (L–Z). Based on the original work by E. Muret and D. Sanders. Completely revised 1974. Berlin, Munich, Vienna, Zurich: Langenscheidt. The Fat Rat volume, you said? 39 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And then all hell broke loose. 40 KATHERINE: The party? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And Wendy's song! 42 KATHERINE: Loud? 43 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Just as loud as my Govinda. 44 KATHERINE: And how loud was that? 45 CHRISTIANUS: Enough to get us both evicted. And convicted. 46 KATHERINE: Not with me as your representative. 47 CHRISTIANUS: I thought you were mostly into litigation? In Florida? 48 KATHERINE: Sure. But I could widen my horizons. 49 CHRISTIANUS: How would that work? 50 KATHERINE: Well, we could start simply by suggesting that if they, for example, agreed not to evict you, then we would also not start preparing for a case against them. 5 CHRISTIANUS: Aha. Blackmail! 52 KATHERINE: I prefer to call it 'business as usual'. And that would most probably be the end of it. Can we continue? 160 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 53 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. Where were we? 54 KATHERINE: Wendy's loud song, I think. 55 CHRISTIANUS: Right. But that wasn't the main problem. 56 KATHERINE: It wasn't? 57 CHRISTIANUS: No. The main problem was that the Billboard Boys didn't follow my lead. 58 KATHERINE: Why would they? 59 CHRISTIANUS: Well, my music is in another class. 60 KATHERINE: Maybe they didn't know? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe. 62 KATHERINE: Or maybe they simply were a gang of rebels! 63 CHRISTIANUS: Exactly! That's what I think. 64 KATHERINE: Or at least wanted to give that impression. 65 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, yes. Perfect! 66 KATHERINE: So you played in C Major, but the Rebels didn't? 67 CHRISTIANUS: Correct. And they also used a defyingly different tempo. 68 KATHERINE: And vociferous vocals, I presume? 69 CHRISTIANUS: You got it. Which brings me to the crescendo. 161The Fat Rat 70 KATHERINE: The crescendo? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Or, perhaps I should say, to the diminuendo. 72 KATHERINE: I am not a music major. 73 CHRISTIANUS: OK. But at least you know what 'innuendo' means? 74 KATHERINE: Of course. 75 CHRISTIANUS: In any case, I just couldn't keep my own song on. It was too disconcerting. 76 KATHERINE: A clash of civilizations! 77 CHRISTIANUS: Well put! 78 KATHERINE: But tell me one thing, Chris. 79 CHRISTIANUS: What? 80 KATHERINE: Why didn't you just use your headphones until the party was over? To keep The Rebels at bay, and away? 8 CHRISTIANUS: First because my headphones would not have masked out the Riot Rookies completely; so I could not have enjoyed my music. 82 KATHERINE: Anything else? 83 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. I also felt that there was something else going on. 84 KATHERINE: What? 85 CHRISTIANUS: Something magical! 162 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 86 KATHERINE: Magical? 87 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. 88 KATHERINE: You mean like Love? 89 CHRISTIANUS: No. 90 KATHERINE: Are you sure? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Reasonably. 92 KATHERINE: How do you know? 93 CHRISTIANUS: Well, at that time Wendy and I weren't exactly on speaking terms. If that's what you thought. 94 KATHERINE: No, I didn't think anything. Or at least not that. 95 CHRISTIANUS: So there was something else in the air that night. 96 KATHERINE: What? 97 CHRISTIANUS: Some otherworldly promise. 98 KATHERINE: Otherworldly promise? What in heavens name are you talking about now? 99 CHRISTIANUS: A promise of a revelation. That would give me clarity. 00 KATHERINE: About what? 0 CHRISTIANUS: I didn't have the faintest idea. 02 KATHERINE: Great! 03 CHRISTIANUS: So I had to put myself in true 'observer mode', and not try to interfere with anything. Whatever was about to 163The Fat Rat happen. 04 KATHERINE: If something was about to happen, that is. 05 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Exactly. 06 KATHERINE: And? 07 CHRISTIANUS: And that's when I got the impulse. 08 KATHERINE: What impulse? 09 CHRISTIANUS: The one connected to the almost intolerable incommensurability that I was experiencing. 0 KATHERINE: You mean with your music and the Boisterous Billboard Rebels in the same room?  CHRISTIANUS: Precisely. 2 KATHERINE: So? 3 CHRISTIANUS: So my whole system screamed 'Turn OFF the player!' 4 KATHERINE: No wonder! 5 CHRISTIANUS: But since I was in 'observer mode', I couldn't do it. 6 KATHERINE: Couldn't? Or wouldn't? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Take a pick. 8 KATHERINE: Do you have a point? 9 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Be patient. 20 KATHERINE: It's soon 2008. 164 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 2 CHRISTIANUS: You're exaggerating. It's not even April yet. Or noon. And my point is 'Be Patient'. 22 KATHERINE: That's nothing new. 23 CHRISTIANUS: No, but it's still relevant, nonetheless. 24 KATHERINE: How so? 25 CHRISTIANUS: For if I hadn't been patient, I wouldn't have discovered what I discovered. 26 KATHERINE: And what did you discover? If you don't mind me asking? 27 CHRISTIANUS: I don't mind. 28 KATHERINE: So? 29 CHRISTIANUS: Well, at first I discovered nothing. 30 KATHERINE: Who would have guessed? 3 CHRISTIANUS: More than that almost intolerable inconvenience of the incommensurability itself, of course. 32 KATHERINE: Of course. Which is why you had to be so extraordinarily patient. 33 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 34 KATHERINE: And? 35 CHRISTIANUS: Then it happened. 36 KATHERINE: What? 165The Fat Rat 37 CHRISTIANUS: The light went out. 38 KATHERINE: The light? 39 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And my CD player with it. 40 KATHERINE: Why? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Destiny, I suppose. 42 KATHERINE: Come on! 43 CHRISTIANUS: Well, the problem was that I had something brewing in the kitchen. 44 KATHERINE: More coffee? 45 CHRISTIANUS: No, I don't drink coffee in the evening. If I do, I can't sleep. 46 KATHERINE: So what was it? 47 CHRISTIANUS: My little physics experiment. 48 KATHERINE: Brewing? 49 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. My cold fusion project. 50 KATHERINE: What about it? 5 CHRISTIANUS: I left it on. 52 KATHERINE: And? 53 CHRISTIANUS: It suddenly stopped. 54 KATHERINE: Why? 55 CHRISTIANUS: I didn't know. It was dark! 56 KATHERINE: But didn't you have some matches or something? 57 CHRISTIANUS: No. But after a while I finally 166 Wendy's Risky Role-Play found one of Wendy's old lighters lying in my bedroom. 58 KATHERINE: Wendy's? In your bedroom? 59 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But it's not what you think. 60 KATHERINE: I don't care. I really don't. Sheeesh! 6 CHRISTIANUS: Good. 62 KATHERINE: And then what? 63 CHRISTIANUS: Then I found it. 64 KATHERINE: Found what? 65 CHRISTIANUS: The fat rat! 66 KATHERINE: You're kidding? 67 CHRISTIANUS: No. 68 KATHERINE: How big? 69 CHRISTIANUS: Big enough not to fit comfortably in my left shoe. See? 70 KATHERINE: Goodness! But how did he end up there? Did you have some old cheese lying around? 7 CHRISTIANUS: No. I never leave cheese 'lying around'. I'm much too fond of it myself. 72 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 73 CHRISTIANUS: So, somehow or other, our furry friend got stuck in the midst of my experiment. And was instantly electro167The Fat Rat cuted. 74 KATHERINE: How terrible! 75 CHRISTIANUS: I know, I know. I would never have hurt the poor fellow otherwise! 76 KATHERINE: I would! 77 CHRISTIANUS: Well, you're a lawyer. I'm not. 78 KATHERINE: True. So what did you do? 79 CHRISTIANUS: The only thing I could do. 80 KATHERINE: Which was? 8 CHRISTIANUS: I opened the window. 82 KATHERINE: And threw him out? From the third floor? 83 CHRISTIANUS: No, that wasn't the plan. 84 KATHERINE: But you did it anyway? Is that it? 85 CHRISTIANUS: No. 86 KATHERINE: What was the plan, then? 87 CHRISTIANUS: To clean the air. 88 KATHERINE: You were worried about oxygen? At that point? 89 CHRISTIANUS: You would have been too. The smell was absolutely intolerable! We're x1:150, What about it? Katherine's notso-very-surprised attitude might be explained by her educational background and interests: she is a lawyer and business woman, and not so much into physics and lab experiments. Therefore, she may not be extremely eager to understand the potential complexity of the kind of laboratory setup that Christianus here might be alluding to. 168 Wendy's Risky Role-Play not talking about nine volts here. 90 KATHERINE: But what about your first experiment? Weren't you already in 'observer mode', or whatever you called it? Didn't you say you must do nothing? Nothing at all? 9 CHRISTIANUS: You're right. I did say that. 92 KATHERINE: But? 93 CHRISTIANUS: But I thought that the unfortunate fate of the fat rat was the secret sign. Pandora's noxious Fox-Box unlocked, so to speak. 94 KATHERINE: Whatever gave you that idea? 95 CHRISTIANUS: That it was Pandora's? 96 KATHERINE: No, that it was the secret sign. 97 CHRISTIANUS: Ah! Well, when you get a clash of two incommensurability pairs - one musical pair and one scientific pair - how can you not act? 98 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 99 CHRISTIANUS: So I acted. And opened the window. 200 KATHERINE: OK. 169 x1:189, not . . . nine volts: When Christianus here is describing the circumstances around the intolerable smell of the rat, saying that he does not talk about any 'nine volts', we may be reasonably sure that this is not a reference to a lower voltage. But it is unclear whether his setup is based on an old concept (e.g., Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons's version of cold fusion), or whether it is a completely new design. The Fat Rat 20 CHRISTIANUS: And it was very liberating to get rid of that smell! 202 KATHERINE: I bet. But where did the incommensurabilities go? Out the window, too? 203 CHRISTIANUS: I'm coming to that. 204 KATHERINE: Good. But first I need to visit the Blue Door again. 205 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. No problem. 170 Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE XII. Localization or Globalization?  KATHERINE: Sorry about that. 2 CHRISTIANUS: There is nothing to apologize for. We should get rid of any unnecessary tension and pain, if we simply can. For if we are relaxed, our systems work better. 3 KATHERINE: I agree. But please go on with your story. 4 CHRISTIANUS: OK. So there I am. With an open window and a roasted rat behind my back. And some reasonably fresh air gently blowing into my needy nostrils. 5 KATHERINE: Right. 6 CHRISTIANUS: And then I suddenly realize that I now hear more of the Bad Boys from upstairs. 7 KATHERINE: Did Wendy and her friends turn up the volume? 8 CHRISTIANUS: No. The 'moreness' wasn't about volume in that sense. It was more about frequency distribution. 9 KATHERINE: OK? 0 CHRISTIANUS: Since we now both had our windows open, I also could hear higher frequencies, not just the bass, or the midrange.  KATHERINE: So what? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I wasn't finished. 3 KATHERINE: You never are! 4 CHRISTIANUS: Just hold on. It'll be OK. 5 KATHERINE: If you insist! 6 CHRISTIANUS: So the problem was that there was another incommensurability building up. 7 KATHERINE: Another one? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Interacting with itself. 9 KATHERINE: I don't follow. 20 CHRISTIANUS: Well, when my window was closed, I only heard the bass, didn't I? 2 KATHERINE: Yes. And some midrange. 22 CHRISTIANUS: Exactly. But then, after I had opened my window, didn't also the higher frequencies make themselves known? 23 KATHERINE: They did. 24 CHRISTIANUS: And didn't all of these frequencies come from the same song? 25 KATHERINE: I guess. x11:34, trebellian sound: The adjective 'trebellian' is not found in most ordinary English dictionaries. So we should probably assume that it is another one of Christianus's home-made studio productions, in which he has mixed the two nouns 'treble' and 'rebel' and added some extra sound effects at the 172 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 26 CHRISTIANUS: So how could there be any incommensurability? 27 KATHERINE: I haven't got a clue, Chris. And I have a headache. 28 CHRISTIANUS: It will soon be over. It's simple. 29 KATHERINE: OK. 30 CHRISTIANUS: But there is a delay. 3 KATHERINE: Delay? I thought you said it would soon be over? 32 CHRISTIANUS: Don't worry. The 'delay' is just part of the explanation. So it's not an estimation of how long it takes me to explain it. Unless, of course, you ask too many questions in between. 33 KATHERINE: All right, all right. 34 CHRISTIANUS: So the trebellian sound from Wendy's open window reaches my open window a little bit later than the bass sound does, creating a comparatively long 'short delay' effect, almost like it had gone through a digital delay in a recording studio. 35 KATHERINE: How come? 36 CHRISTIANUS: Well, the bass goes rather 173 end, to create an adjective. In this scenario, a trebellian sound would therefore amount to a sound having two combined qualities: 1) it would have a frequency distribution with more audible treble than midrange or bass; and 2) it would originate from a rebellious person, group, or consciousness. Localization or Globalization? quickly right through her floor down into my apartment; but the treble must first bounce off of the wall of that other apartment house before it finally reaches my open window. 37 KATHERINE: So? 38 CHRISTIANUS: So even though Wendy and her friends upstairs may experience the Rex11:36, bounce . . . the wall: According to Christianus, the treble sound originating from Wendy's apartment bounces off of the wall of another apartment building. But how far away is that building? Our first step is to calculate the time it takes for Wendy's (bass) sound to reach Christianus's apartment in a direct way, through the walls, floors, and ceilings of their own apartment building. First, let us guess that Christianus and Wendy's apartment building is an oldstyle building with high-ceiling apartments, and that the vertical distance between Christianus and Wendy's apartments (and their respective windows) therefore would amount to something like 3.5 meters. Furthermore, let us assume, for simplicity's sake, that Wendy's speakers are placed relatively near her windows, and that her windows are right above Christianus's windows. We will also assume that the indoor temperature is normal, and that the quickest sound propagation between Wendy's and Christianus's apartment occurs in the walls, floor, and ceiling, with some propagation also in the indoor air; and since we know that the speed of sound in typical building materials is approximately ten times greater than the speed of sound in air (wood: 3300 m/s; brick: 3600 m/s; concrete: 3700 m/s; Grondzik 2010, p. 740), we may estimate that the sound will travel at approximately 3000 m/s between the apartments. Therefore, since the distance is 3.5 m, the sound will propagate down to Christianus's apartment in 0.0012 seconds (3.5/3000). Our second step is to determine the total time it takes for Wendy's (treble) sound to travel in the outdoor air to the opposite wall of another apartment building, where it will bounce and return to Christianus's open window. This time is dependent on the 'short delay' that Christianus mentions at x11:34. Since Christianus talks about that 'short delay' in music recording terms, we may estimate that a 'typical' such delay (applied to, for instance, vocals or guitars) might be anywhere from 3 to 30 milliseconds, with 15 milliseconds (i.e., 0.015 seconds) as a mean value; but since he also mentions that the short delay is 'comparatively long', let us use 30 milliseconds (i.e., 0.03 seconds) as our estimate (cf. Savage 2011, p. 189). Furthermore, we also know that the sound originally was transmitted 0.0012 174 Wendy's Risky Role-Play bellious Riot Boys in a perfectly synched fashion, someone else in another location may experience incommensurability, or out-of-synchness. 39 KATHERINE: And this is perfectly natural? 40 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. It's what I call a 'localization' incommensurability. 4 KATHERINE: Why? 175 seconds earlier from Wendy's speakers; therefore, the sound has been travelling 0.0312 seconds (0.03 + 0.0012) in the outdoor air. Our third step is to calculate the distance that the sound has travelled in the outdoor air. Since Christianus says (at x111:21) that Wendy's party took place '[a] year ago or so', let us assume that the outdoor temperature that evening in the late winter or early spring of 2006 was around 5 °C. Then, knowing that the speed of sound in air is 331 m/s at 0 °C and 343 m/s at 20 °C (Cutnell and Johnson 2001, p. 468), we can make a quick linear estimation and use 334 m/s as the speed of sound in air that has a temperature of 5 °C. This will then result in a travelled distance of 10.4208 meters (0.0312 * 334). Now to the fourth and last step. Assuming that there is only one 'bouncing spot' on the wall of the opposite apartment building, we can, with some elementary trigonometry, figure out its approximate horizontal distance, as measured from either Christianus's or Wendy's window. Let dW be the diagonal distance from Wendy's window (down) to the 'bouncing spot', and let dC be the diagonal distance from the 'bouncing spot' (down) to Christianus's window. Then, assuming that dW and dC are equal, dW = dC = 10.4208/2 = 5.2104 meters. Finally, using the Pythagorean Theorem to calculate the horizontal distance h between Christianus's (or Wendy's) window and the wall of the opposite apartment building - using dW (or dC) as the hypothenuse, and half the apartment height (3.5/2) as one of the legs of the triangle - we would get h2 + 1.752 = dW 2 (or h2 + 1.752 = dC 2), resulting in h = √(dW 2 – 1.752) = √(dC 2 – 1.752) = √(5.21042 – 1.752) = √(27.1483 – 3.0625) = √24.0858 = 4.9077. The wall of the opposite apartment building is thus approximately 5 meters horizontally away from Christianus and Wendy's windows. CUTNELL AND JOHNSON (2001), Physics. Fifth edition. New York: John Wiley & Sons. WALTER T. GRONDZIK, ALISON G. KWOK, BENJAMIN STEIN, AND JOHN S. REYNOLDS (2010), Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for Buildings. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. STEVE SAVAGE (2011), The Art of Digital Audio Recording: A Practical Guide for Home and Studio. New York: Oxford University Press. Localization or Globalization? 42 CHRISTIANUS: Well, there's only one original player. And if you simply were closer to that player, localizing yourself properly, the incommensurability would automatically go away. 43 KATHERINE: I see. But the Govinda-slashBad-Boys incommensurability isn't like that, is it? 44 CHRISTIANUS: No. There is something else going on. 45 KATHERINE: What? 46 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it's more of a 'globalization' incommensurability. 47 KATHERINE: Globalization? 48 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. When there are two or more players in the same room, or close by. And they all are playing different tunes. 49 KATHERINE: So there is no escape? 50 CHRISTIANUS: Not if you are simply an observer. 5 KATHERINE: But what if I just moved far, f-a-r away? 52 CHRISTIANUS: You could. But that wouldn't solve the problem. 53 KATHERINE: Why not? 54 CHRISTIANUS: For even if you would be able to lower the volume of the original incommensurability, new ones would al176 Wendy's Risky Role-Play ways pop up at your new location. It's globalization, remember? 55 KATHERINE: But what if I still were able to avoid any new incommensurabilities at my new location? Wouldn't that then be a great spot? 56 CHRISTIANUS: Not necessarily. 57 KATHERINE: Why not? 58 CHRISTIANUS: It's true that you do not want incommensurability. But you do want something. And that something is not silence. That's the whole point. Silence is not on the table, right now. 59 KATHERINE: And our coffee and scones aren't either. 60 CHRISTIANUS: I know. I am not sure what she is up to. 6 KATHERINE: Maybe it's just because they are one man short? Just like she said? 62 CHRISTIANUS: I doubt it. We'll just have to more patient, I guess. 63 KATHERINE: But couldn't we just kick out everyone in the room? 64 CHRISTIANUS: Patience, my dear. Patience! 65 KATHERINE: No, no, not in this room; I meant in the 'globalization' example. 66 CHRISTIANUS: How do you mean? 177Localization or Globalization? 67 KATHERINE: Well, couldn't we just get rid of all players except one? To stop the incommensurability? 68 CHRISTIANUS: But some players are people, so it's difficult. 69 KATHERINE: Why? 70 CHRISTIANUS: Because people sometimes have legal rights. Or at least the appearance of it. 7 KATHERINE: So you mean, if you give people a green card, one can not just revoke it the next week and send them back to China or Antarctica, or wherever they came from? 72 CHRISTIANUS: That would be the idea. Or kick out people from their apartments in a random fashion. And certainly not just because they are playing a different song than their neighbours are. 73 KATHERINE: But what if we are not talking about people? What if we are talking about songs, for instance? What's the problem? 74 CHRISTIANUS: The problem is not simply that you must get rid of all the songs playing except one. The problem is also that you may not want to get rid of all those songs. Maybe you like some of them. 75 KATHERINE: So even if I realize that there is incommensurability, I may still be too 178 Wendy's Risky Role-Play attached to turn off the player? 76 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, just like Wendy. She didn't stop playing the Rebel Rousers even when there was incommensurability in the air. Even though it may have been good for her. 77 KATHERINE: Too bad she works here, then. With all this lovely Victorian music. 78 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha. Right. Poor Wendy! 79 KATHERINE: But how does all of this relate to my sugar problem? 80 CHRISTIANUS: The idea is simple. Just like you have a memory of different songs and musical styles, you have a memory of different tastes. 8 KATHERINE: OK? 82 CHRISTIANUS: And with that memory, you can predict future incommensurabilities. 83 KATHERINE: So I know that, if the Rebel Jazzers are already playing, I will definitely experience incommensurability as soon as I put on some spiritual Govinda music? 84 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Which is why you may decide not to play it. 85 KATHERINE: Or play it very loud. 86 CHRISTIANUS: Right. 87 KATHERINE: So what do we have? 179Localization or Globalization? 88 CHRISTIANUS: Well, the problem is that the Rebel Raiders are not quitting voluntarily. 89 KATHERINE: Am I Wendy now? 90 CHRISTIANUS: You mean with access to the Rebel music player? 9 KATHERINE: Yes. 92 CHRISTIANUS: No. Wendy is Wendy, as I already pointed out. And the Rebel Band is the Rebel Band. But you can play me, if you like. Being in my apartment, when Wendy is upstairs. 93 KATHERINE: OK. 94 CHRISTIANUS: So the situation is this. We know that the Rebel Wreckers song, just like sugar, is bad, in the long run, for everyone. 95 KATHERINE: Is it? For everyone? Including Wendy? 96 CHRISTIANUS: We'll assume it for now. 97 KATHERINE: OK. 98 CHRISTIANUS: And we also know that, just as we will be able to experience the Govinda-slash-Rebel incommensurability, and be able to predict it, so will Wendy. 99 KATHERINE: But? 00 CHRISTIANUS: But we also know that Wendy doesn't like Govinda. 180 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 0 KATHERINE: OK. 02 CHRISTIANUS: So she'll rather have a little incommensurability than hearing Govinda 'clean'. 03 KATHERINE: Right. 04 CHRISTIANUS: So what do we do? 05 KATHERINE: I don't know. 06 CHRISTIANUS: I do. 07 KATHERINE: Yes? 08 CHRISTIANUS: Let's hypnotize her. 09 KATHERINE: Are you crazy? 0 CHRISTIANUS: It's not as difficult as it sounds.  KATHERINE: Maybe. But isn't it illegal? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Could be. But we are very fond of her, and we are actually just making her a favour. 3 KATHERINE: We are? 4 CHRISTIANUS: So here's the plan. 5 KATHERINE: But I'm not sure . . . 6 CHRISTIANUS: If you want to change someone's behaviour, how do you do it? 7 KATHERINE: You mean like in the Manchurian Candidate? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Oh, you saw it? 9 KATHERINE: Yes. Talk about scary! 181Localization or Globalization? 20 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. But we have good intentions. And no drugs and guns. And no connection to any secret military or governmental intelligence or terrorist agency. 2 KATHERINE: OK. 22 CHRISTIANUS: But in order to impress her system, we need her to be relaxed. 23 KATHERINE: Is this where the hypnotization comes in? 24 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it's actually just pseudohypnotization. For we need everything to be on remote. 25 KATHERINE: On remote? 26 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. We don't want any breaking-and-enterings, do we? 27 KATHERINE: Absolutely not. 28 CHRISTIANUS: So, we'll just let her hypnotize herself. x11:117, Manchurian Candidate: Since Richard Condon's 1959 book The Manchurian Candidate has been adapted to film twice, there would some room for the possibility that Katherine and Christianus are not talking about the same version. However, since the first version was released already in 1962 (starring Frank Sinatra, Laurence Harvey, and Janet Leigh), it seems more likely that they both are talking about the second version released in 2004 (starring Denzel Washington, Liev Schreiber, and Meryl Streep). For an interesting (but perhaps deliberately misrepresentative) account of a 'Manchurian candidate', see Streatfeild (2007); for a Tavistock introduction to 'behaviour modification', including theories of learning, assessment and evaluation, emotional reactions, stimulus control, response control, and ethical con182 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 29 KATHERINE: How? When? 30 CHRISTIANUS: When she goes to sleep. 3 KATHERINE: Sleep? 32 CHRISTIANUS: That's relaxed enough. 33 KATHERINE: OK? 34 CHRISTIANUS: And then we'll just start our music programming. 35 KATHERINE: Music programming? 36 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Govinda. Not too high, not too low. 37 KATHERINE: Playing where? 38 CHRISTIANUS: In my apartment. 39 KATHERINE: And this will do what, exactly? 40 CHRISTIANUS: It will accustom her to Govinda, in a relaxed state. 4 KATHERINE: Hmmm. But isn't there a problem? 42 CHRISTIANUS: What? 183 siderations, see Sheldon (1982); and for an account of links between the Tavistock Institute for Human Relations, the Stanford Research Institute's Center for the Study of Social Policy, the Beatles, Alan Ginsberg, the New York Times, brainwashing and social conditioning, gang wars, LSD, and international drug trade, see Coleman's well-researched book (Coleman 1992, pp. 99–112). JOHN COLEMAN (1992), The Conspirators' Hierarchy: The Committee of 300. Second edition. Carson City, NV: Joseph Publishing Co. BRIAN SHELDON (1982), Behaviour Modification: Theory, Practice, and Philosophy. London and New York: Tavistock Publications. DOMINIC STREATFEILD (2007), 'Building the Manchurian Candidate' in Brainwash: The Secret History of Mind Control. New York: Picador, pp. 135–170. Localization or Globalization? 43 KATHERINE: What if she has her windows open, and you have yours open too? Wouldn't there then be some incommensurability problem? Which would imprint Govinda badly? 44 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, you're right. We would then have the 'localization' variant. Which may, as you say, interfere with our plans. 45 KATHERINE: So then you must always be careful to at least have your windows closed, right? 46 CHRISTIANUS: No. 47 KATHERINE: No? 48 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it's true that I would have to keep them closed whenever I would be playing Govinda. For we would not want to imprint any unnecessary incommensurability in that case. 49 KATHERINE: There's another case? 50 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. We have another type of programming to do. 5 KATHERINE: We do? 52 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. We also need to gradually increase her disliking of the Rebel Rascals. 53 KATHERINE: So we use the idea with the open windows? 54 CHRISTIANUS: Exactly. 184 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 55 KATHERINE: But isn't there a problem, nevertheless? 56 CHRISTIANUS: What? 57 KATHERINE: The winter? 58 CHRISTIANUS: What about it? It's nine months away! 59 KATHERINE: Why would she have her windows open during the night in the wintertime? I mean, maybe she doesn't even have them open in the summer? I don't know her. 60 CHRISTIANUS: But I do. 6 KATHERINE: And? 62 CHRISTIANUS: It may be hard to believe, but she just loves sleeping with her windows open. Even in the winter. 63 KATHERINE: Brrr! 64 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Yes. 65 KATHERINE: But it's of course a fantastic way to get an undisturbed and oxygen-filled good night's sleep. 66 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. 67 KATHERINE: But I still don't see how this would solve my sugar problem. I mean we're not talking about my music taste, are we? 68 CHRISTIANUS: Not directly. 185Localization or Globalization? 69 KATHERINE: So? 70 CHRISTIANUS: One thing we could do is to use some motivational tapes, and try to change your taste that way. 7 KATHERINE: You mean listening to 'I love celery' and 'I hate sugar' all night long? 72 CHRISTIANUS: Possibly. 73 KATHERINE: What if I don't want to do that? Or what if doesn't work? Aren't there any hands-on-type exercises I could do? With my tongue? 74 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. You could do the Govinda-type impression, but with live foodstuffs. 75 KATHERINE: But how is that possible? Eating while sleeping? 76 CHRISTIANUS: No, that's too dangerous. 77 KATHERINE: Is there an alternative? 78 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But we still have to follow the principle. 79 KATHERINE: Which one? 80 CHRISTIANUS: That we want to make an impression only when we are as relaxed as possible. 8 KATHERINE: And? 82 CHRISTIANUS: The best time to do so is in the morning, immediately after awakening. 186 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 83 KATHERINE: Why then? 84 CHRISTIANUS: At that time our rational mind is not fully awake. It's still a little groggy after sleeping so long. So at that time it will object the least to any new impressions that we may want to give it. 85 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. 86 CHRISTIANUS: Another reason is that, just as in the sleeping case, it will allow us to imprint things first, before we really start our day and do other things. 87 KATHERINE: Right. 88 CHRISTIANUS: And, just to recap, the idea is to find foods and drinks that are incompatible with each other. Or incommensurable. 89 KATHERINE: You mean in terms of their chemistry? 90 CHRISTIANUS: Sure, biochemistry is part of it. But I am mainly referring to the subjective, perceived sensation of taste that a person experiences when he or she eats or drinks certain things that 'clash' in taste, or go tremendously ill together. 9 KATHERINE: So it 's about perceived taste? 92 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Subjective, perceived taste. 93 KATHERINE: So what's your advice? 94 CHRISTIANUS: It's simple. 187Localization or Globalization? 95 KATHERINE: Yes? 96 CHRISTIANUS: There are two steps. 97 KATHERINE: And they are? 98 CHRISTIANUS: First you have to find a taste that is incommensurable with the taste you want to get rid of. 99 KATHERINE: And? 200 CHRISTIANUS: And then you have to sit on it. 20 KATHERINE: Excuse me? 202 CHRISTIANUS: Remember fiffs? 203 KATHERINE: Sure. 204 CHRISTIANUS: So when Baldy found a free seat, did he then weasel his way over to sit on it, or not to sit on it? 205 KATHERINE: To sit on it. 206 CHRISTIANUS: And how many others will Baldy allow to sit on that seat, especially if they are incommensurable with him? 207 KATHERINE: None. 208 CHRISTIANUS: Exactly. And even if a very sexy and non-incommensurable Barbie-babe would want a seat, Baldy will say no. 209 KATHERINE: Are you sure? 20 CHRISTIANUS: Why would he say 'yes'? There are no other seats. 2 KATHERINE: What if she is irresistable? 188 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 22 CHRISTIANUS: All right. He might tolerate some close encounters for a short while. But he still won't give up his seat. And eventually he will have to kick her out so that he can fully enjoy his Cookie Monster Treat alone, without sharing. 23 KATHERINE: What a monster! 24 CHRISTIANUS: So once having found that incommensurable taste that you are looking for, you then just have to 'flood your system' with it, before you eat or drink anything else, with or without sugar in it. 25 KATHERINE: So if I want to get rid of my sugar cravings, I have to locate a taste that, for me, is incompatible with the taste of sugar? And then I just immerse myself in that taste, before I eat or drink anything else? Is that the plan? 26 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 27 KATHERINE: But isn't your point that I should stop eating sugar? 28 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. 29 KATHERINE: So why are you saying 'with or without sugar'? It sounds like I should be eating or drinking sugar. Or at least could. 220 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 22 KATHERINE: Yes what? 189Localization or Globalization? 222 CHRISTIANUS: Since your mind is too conditioned in terms of enjoying sugar, it will object too much if you, or anyone else, present the idea that you, Katherine, must stop eating sugar. 223 KATHERINE: So? 224 CHRISTIANUS: So the idea is that we will recondition your system, not simply by issuing some prohibitive statements, but by carefully orchestrating certain sensory experiences that will bypass your argumentative mind, and lead you in the right direction. 225 KATHERINE: Any recommendations? 226 CHRISTIANUS: As I just said, it is a subjective experience. So any particular recommendations regarding the first part may or may not work for you. 227 KATHERINE: OK. But couldn't you give me an example, anyway? I mean, how did you do it? Which incommensurable taste did you use? x11:230, three or four times: Christianus's statement that he took one glass of lemon juice three or four times a day does not, at a first glance, seem to fit very well with his recommendation that one should drink such juice immediately after awakening. So how should we understand it? One interpretation might be that he is suggesting that one should, already from day one, still try to drink another three glasses of lemon juice throughout the day, even though one has already taken one in the morning. But whether or not four glasses a day would be the end goal or not, it seems reasonable to 190 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 228 CHRISTIANUS: I discovered that lemon was very effective. 229 KATHERINE: Lemon? 230 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. So I started drinking a glass of lemon juice three or four times a day, to 'push out' my affinity for sugar. 23 KATHERINE: Three or four whole glasses? That must have been the juice of dozens of lemons! 232 CHRISTIANUS: No, no. It was diluted juice. Each glass only contained the freshly pressed juice of half a lemon. And then I simply added water. So my daily juice quota was, on average, only the equivalent of about two lemons. 233 KATHERINE: That sounds doable. 234 CHRISTIANUS: Sure it is doable. That's not the issue. The issue is whether or not it is efficacious. For you. 235 KATHERINE: You mean efficient? 236 CHRISTIANUS: Approximately. As I said ear191 suggest that the more glasses of lemon juice one can drink, the better, even on day one. Another interpretation might be that Christianus is talking about the later phases of his own experiences, even though he explicitly says 'started' in the beginning of the sentence. So on this reading the idea could be that one should begin the process by taking just one glass of lemon juice in the morning, and then, perhaps after a few days or so, increase one's quota with another glass, say, at noon. And when one can drink four glasses, spread out during the day, the process would (perhaps) be complete. Localization or Globalization? lier, your taste buds and your nervous system may be different than mine. Perhaps lemon is not incommensurable with sugar, for you. 237 KATHERINE: Right. 238 CHRISTIANUS: So you just have to find something that works. 239 KATHERINE: And then it will automatically work for me? Come on, Chris! 240 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, if it is a good theory, it will. 24 KATHERINE: Is it a good theory? 242 CHRISTIANUS: It hasn't failed yet. 243 KATHERINE: Hmmm. 192 Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE XIII. Wendy's Risky Role-Play  CHRISTIANUS: Ah! Here she comes! 2 KATHERINE: I can't wait! 3 CHRISTIANUS: Coffee! Mmmm! 4 KATHERINE: And scones! 5 CHRISTIANUS: And lots of cream! Well done! 6 WENDY: Can I? 7 KATHERINE: Yes, but just half a cup, thanks. 8 WENDY: Cream? 9 KATHERINE: Only a little. 0 WENDY: OK.  KATHERINE: Thank you. 2 WENDY: Chris? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Just my usual one-oh-one routine. 4 WENDY: Sure. 5 KATHERINE: Chris, don't forget the song! 6 CHRISTIANUS: What song? 7 KATHERINE: The Billboard one. Remember? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Oh! Right, right, r-i-g-h-t! How could I forget? Wendy? 9 WENDY: Yes, sweetie? 20 KATHERINE: Sweetie? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Remember that big party you had at your place? A year ago or so? 22 WENDY: You mean my 'Girls Gone Mild – Not!' party? On my birthday? 23 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And you played that highenergy pop-rock song over and over again? Your favourite? 24 WENDY: Oh, you mean 'Dirty Little Secret'? 25 CHRISTIANUS: Yes! That's the one! 26 KATHERINE: With? 27 WENDY: Which planet are you from? And century? 28 KATHERINE: I was just asking. Politely! 29 WENDY: It's the All-American Rejects. Duh! 30 KATHERINE: Duh? 3 BALDY: Wendy! Over here! 32 WENDY: Sorry, my boyfriend is calling. 33 CHRISTIANUS: Baldy is your boyfriend? 34 WENDY: Well, not really. But that's what he thinks. 35 CHRISTIANUS: So he's not? 36 WENDY: No. But he's hot. And I like his Ferrari very much. He even lets me drive it! 37 CHRISTIANUS: Sounds risky. 194 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 38 WENDY: Yes. Actually, I really need a time-out. He's a big guy, and I'm starting to get a little nervous. Maybe you and I could get together, and talk? 39 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. When? 40 WENDY: Tomorrow evening at seven? At our old place? 4 CHRISTIANUS: OK. 42 BALDY: Hey! Wendy! Come on! Bitch! 43 WENDY: Sorry, I have to run. 44 KATHERINE: Please do! 45 WENDY: Tomorrow, then? 46 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. 47 KATHERINE: 'Absolutely!' 48 CHRISTIANUS: What was that all about? 49 KATHERINE: What? 50 CHRISTIANUS: 'Please do!' - 'Absolutely!' 5 KATHERINE: Nothing. 52 CHRISTIANUS: Nothing? 53 KATHERINE: As you already know, I haven't been feeling very well lately. And I'm starving. So let's at last have our coffee and scones! 54 CHRISTIANUS: And cream! 55 KATHERINE: Yes. But tell me something, Chris. 195Wendy's Risky Role-Play 56 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. 57 KATHERINE: What's that 'one-oh-one' routine you were mentioning? 58 CHRISTIANUS: Didn't you watch Wendy? 59 KATHERINE: Sure I did. She poured coffee in your cream. 60 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Yes. 6 KATHERINE: But what does 'one-oh-one' stand for? Is it some secret code or something? Between you guys? 62 CHRISTIANUS: Well, in a way it is. But it doesn't mean '5', if that's what you thought. 63 KATHERINE: No, I didn't know what to think. I'm not so much into codes. At least not x111:62, it doesn't mean '5': The pronoun 'it' probably refers to the expression 'one-oh-one', which in turn might be understood as '101'. In such a scenario, one might then have been tempted to decipher '101' using the 'base-2 number' (or 'binary numeral') system, where a '1' in the rightmost (first) position would be carrying a value of 20 (i.e., 1), and where a '1' in the leftmost (third) position would carry a value of 22 (i.e., 4), which, when added together, would yield 5. However, as Christianus is very careful to point out, this is not how to decipher it here, in this particular case. x111:64, intelligence free: Apart from the perhaps most straightforward rendering of 'intelligence free' as 'really easy' or 'very simple', Christianus may have had (at least) two other ideas in mind. One idea might be that the phrase 'intelligence free' should be understood in a very literal way, not merely as 'really easy' or 'very simple', but as requiring no intelligence at all. For it is possible that Christianus's understanding of a Turing machine (see the illustration in Bechtel 2002, p. 10; cf. Crane 1991, pp. 91–102) simply echoes Fodor's understanding of a Turing machine's typical bottom-level tasks, referring to them as 'unintelligent operations', including 'deleting symbols, storing symbols, copying symbols, and the rest' (Fodor 1988, p. 23). Another idea might be that the decoding of '101' does not involve any secret intelligence people or resources, 196 Wendy's Risky Role-Play non-legal ones. 64 CHRISTIANUS: That's too bad. It's fun and basically intelligence free. So you don't have to be some new Alan Turing to decode it. Or old, for that matter. 65 KATHERINE: Alan Turing? 66 CHRISTIANUS: One of those brave British numerologists at Bletchley Park who helped decrypt the secret communication codes that the Germans used during World War Two. 67 KATHERINE: Oh, I see. And 'one-oh-one'? 68 CHRISTIANUS: It just means 'one hundred and one'. 69 KATHERINE: One hundred and one what? Tea197 neither at Bletchley Park nor anywhere else, since (in this case) the only decoders would be Christianus and Katherine. So all computers - a word that in Turing's writings means 'computing human beings', as Urquhart correctly points out (Urquhart 2002, p. 313) - would be construed as non-military civilians, not being part of any (secret) intelligence operation. WILLIAM BECHTEL, ADELE ABRAHAMSEN, AND GEORGE GRAHAM (2002), 'The Life of Cognitive Science' in William Bechtel and George Graham, eds., A Companion to Cognitive Science. Malden, MA and Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 1–104. TIM CRANE (1991), The Mechanical Mind: A Philosophical Introduction to Minds, Machines and Mental Representation. London: Penguin Books. JERRY A. FODOR (1988), Psychosemantics: The problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge, MA and London, England: MIT Press. ALASDAIR URQUHART (2002), 'Metatheory' in Dale Jaquette, ed., A Companion to Philosophical Logic. Malden, MA and Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 307–318. x111:66, brave British: Though history has seen many brave British men and women, it is not entirely easy to understand why the 'shy, boyish' (Hodges 2007) and 'strange' (Milner-Barry 1993, p. 90) Alan Turing would be one of them. Is there anything particularly brave to be found in, for example, David Cannadine's evaluation that TuWendy's Risky Role-Play spoons? 70 CHRISTIANUS: No. As you know, I'm not so much into tea. 7 KATHERINE: What about spoons? 72 CHRISTIANUS: Sometimes. But not in this case. 73 KATHERINE: What, then? 74 CHRISTIANUS: Per cent. 75 KATHERINE: So you mean 0% coffee? Slightly more coffee than cream? 76 CHRISTIANUS: No. The other way around. 77 KATHERINE: More cream? 78 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 79 KATHERINE: And that's it? 80 CHRISTIANUS: Not quite. 8 KATHERINE: I was afraid of that. 82 CHRISTIANUS: It's actually part of a theory that I am working on. 83 KATHERINE: How original! ring's participation was so crucial that, without it, 'the German codes would probably never have been broken at Bletchley' (Cannadine 1998, p. 168)? Or in the fact that Turing was awarded the Order of the British Empire (Rootselaar 1976)? Or is Christianus simply joking? Or might he be aware of some secret details that could add a heroic and dangerous (personal) dimension to the code-cracking accomplishments of the otherwise (seemingly) rather comfortably Bletchley-Park-situated 'Prof ' (Murray 1993, p. 114)? DAVID CANNADINE (1998), History in Our Time. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. ANDREW HODGES (2007), 'Alan Tur198 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 84 CHRISTIANUS: Anyhow, I call it 'The 0% Anti-Darkness Principle'. 85 KATHERINE: And? 86 CHRISTIANUS: It's about how to courageously cope with life. 87 KATHERINE: And how does one do that? 88 CHRISTIANUS: It's quite simple: when you get something in life that looks really, really dark, then you can attack that darkness by mixing it up with 0% of something else. 89 KATHERINE: Something else? 90 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. The 'brightener'! 9 KATHERINE: What's that? 92 CHRISTIANUS: Well, there are different 'brighteners' for different darknesses, of course. 93 KATHERINE: Of course. And? 94 CHRISTIANUS: Well, for coffee, the optimal 'brightener' is cream. By adding just as much cream as there is coffee and then 199 ing' in Edward N. Zalta, ed., Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Online article retrieved from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy website [http://plato. stanford.edu] on Tuesday, 3 April 2012. Stanford, CA: The Metaphysics Research Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford University. STUART MILNER-BARRY (1993), 'Hut 6: Early Days' in F. H. Hinsley and Alan Stripp, eds., Codebreakers: The Inside story of Bletchley Park. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 89–99. JOAN MURRAY (1993), 'Hut 8 and Naval Enigma, Part I' in F. H. Hinsley and Alan Stripp, eds., Codebreakers: The Inside story of Bletchley Park. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 113–118. Wendy's Risky Role-Play just another tiny one percent more, the coffee concoction will lighten up to become brighter than mid-gray - a very positive transformation indeed! No darkness left, just different shades of brightness! 95 KATHERINE: How philosophical! 96 CHRISTIANUS: And tasty! 97 KATHERINE: Mmmm . . . yes . . . the coffee is excellent. Even without all that cream. 98 CHRISTIANUS: And your scones? 99 KATHERINE: Delicious! 00 CHRISTIANUS: Just like mine. It's amazing how so little somethingness can be so satisfying! 0 KATHERINE: Chris, can't you just stop? And not talk philosophy? I'm trying to enjoy over here! Seriously! 02 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Me too! Ha ha! 03 KATHERINE: You're hopeless! 04 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe. But not in a literal sense, of course. 05 KATHERINE: How do you mean? 06 CHRISTIANUS: I am the one who has the most BOB VAN ROOTSELAAR (1976), 'Turing, Alan Mathison' in Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Scientific Biography, vol. x111 (Hermann Staudinger– Giuseppe Veronese). New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, pp. 497–498. x111:94, cream . . . coffee: Christianus could here have gone even further with the idea of cream as a coffee 'brightener', to connect it with his previous mentioning of Alan Turing. For in an interesting book by Stephen Corteen Cowin and 200 Wendy's Risky Role-Play hope. 07 KATHERINE: Of course. You're in illusion! Ha ha! 08 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha, right. But seriously. 09 KATHERINE: What? 0 CHRISTIANUS: How can you have any hope with your death-and-nothingness scenario? Everything is all over, any minute! Hello, darkness!  KATHERINE: Chris, please! 2 CHRISTIANUS: I just don't get it. Why do you keep hanging on to it? 3 KATHERINE: Why worry so much about the future? Who knows what it will be? 4 CHRISTIANUS: OK. So we won't worry. So why not just quit your job immediately? Now. Today. On the spot. 5 KATHERINE: As I said . . . 6 CHRISTIANUS: But you won't, because you know that there is a tomorrow. In all likelihood. 7 KATHERINE: Yes, but . . . 201 Stephen B. Doty (2007, p. 21), Turing's theory on chemical reactions (Turing 1952) is (partly) explained with the help of cream and coffee. STEPHEN CORTEEN COWIN AND STEPHEN B. DOTY (2007), Tissue Mechanics. New York: Springer. ALAN M. TURING (1952), 'The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis' in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London (Series B, Biological Sciences), vol. 237, no. 641, pp. 37–72. Wendy's Risky Role-Play 8 CHRISTIANUS: So you plan for it. It's in you. 9 KATHERINE: OK, OK. I do worry about death, since it's the end of my life. But I don't believe in any afterlife. So why plan for it? 20 CHRISTIANUS: So the question for you is whether there is afterlife for the individual soul, at all? 2 KATHERINE: It's not a question. I just don't believe it. Unless you prove it. 22 CHRISTIANUS: But I cannot prove to you on a piece of paper that you are an immortal soul and that you have an afterlife. If that's what you're asking. 23 KATHERINE: Why not? 24 CHRISTIANUS: I don't have a piece of paper. 25 KATHERINE: Come on! 26 CHRISTIANUS: All right. But even if I had it, I still couldn't do it. 27 KATHERINE: Why? 28 CHRISTIANUS: Because whatever I scribbled on it, you might say either 'I don't understand it', or 'I don't agree', or 'I don't have time'. 29 KATHERINE: Why would I do that? 30 CHRISTIANUS: Because you might not understand it, or agree, or have the time. Or 202 Wendy's Risky Role-Play you might simply do it because your mind freaks out. 3 KATHERINE: But surely, if I am very interested in the topic, I wouldn't say any of those things. 32 CHRISTIANUS: But you're not very interested. 33 KATHERINE: Perhaps not. But I am a little interested. 34 CHRISTIANUS: That doesn't count for much. Anyone can say that. 203Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE XIV. A Moribund Mortality Proof  KATHERINE: Chris, why can't you just quickly grab a piece of paper and prove that I am an immortal soul with an afterlife? I mean, if it is a fact, as you claim, it shouldn't be that hard. So why not just get on with it, and prove it? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Ah! You want to play the 'Proof Game'? 3 KATHERINE: Well, not really. But let's do it anyway. So we can put that behind us, and do other, more enjoyable things. 4 CHRISTIANUS: Right. But the problem is just that immortality proofs are very, very tricky. And time-consuming. And boring. And I'm also a little tired. So why don't we do something easier? 5 KATHERINE: What? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Do you have a piece of paper? And a pen? 7 KATHERINE: Sure. 8 CHRISTIANUS: Now, I want you to prove on that piece of paper that you are mortal. 9 KATHERINE: Are you kidding? 0 CHRISTIANUS: No. You can scribble anything you like on that piece of paper to prove to the reader, whoever he or she may be, that you are mortal.  KATHERINE: Anything? 2 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. Whatever scientific or nonscientific sentences, algorithms, phrases, words, symbols, or representations you can think of. And you can even draw pictures and use music notation if you like. So how would you then go about proving, on that very piece of paper, that you are mortal? 3 KATHERINE: Can I use a 'direct proof '? With a conclusion, and a couple of premises to back it up? As I sometimes do in court? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. As long as you can make it work. 5 KATHERINE: So where do we start? 6 CHRISTIANUS: Well, first of all, let's get your conclusion up and running. What is it? 7 KATHERINE: How about 'I am mortal'? 8 CHRISTIANUS: Well, Miss Miami, you're on the right track. But there is a problem. 9 KATHERINE: What? 20 CHRISTIANUS: Well, when I read that sentence, I don't think of you; rather, I think of me. So you have to change it. Remem205A Moribund Mortality Proof ber, what I asked you to do was to prove to any reader, that you are mortal. So the task is then not to prove that the reader is mortal - unless the reader is you yourself, of course. So you have to figure out a way to identify yourself, in all cases. 2 KATHERINE: So then I simply write 'Katherine is mortal'. 22 CHRISTIANUS: It's better. But you are not the only Katherine in the world, are you? One of my friends, for example, has a batteryoperated toy cat called Katherine. 23 KATHERINE: Well, what if I identify myself as 'that Katherine who was born in Miami thirty-four years ago'? And if that isn't enough, I could also fill in some more details: the exact hospital, my mother's name, the exact date, etc. 24 CHRISTIANUS: But why would I believe you? You can't just say that you were born that date; that's no proof. Then you could just say that you are mortal, and we wouldn't have to bother with this whole thing. No, you have to prove it. 25 KATHERINE: But I can show you my birth certificate and my passport! 26 CHRISTIANUS: Birth certificates and passports are easy to buy on the black market, so I need not accept that those are yours. 206 Wendy's Risky Role-Play And even if they were authentic, they also have the further defect that they are not on this white piece of paper. Remember, your proof must keep itself on this white paper here. 27 KATHERINE: Then what if I refer to myself as 'that Katherine who is right now sitting next to Christianus in a café in London'? 28 CHRISTIANUS: But that would only be applicable another thirty minutes or so. How can it be a real proof if it is only applicable for another thirty minutes? I didn't ask you to provide a proof that is valid only while your coffee is still warm, did I? 29 KATHERINE: No. 30 CHRISTIANUS: And there is of course also the identity problem. People's bodies, including yours and mine, are always in a flux, since old cells are going and new cells are coming every second of the day. So how are you to uniquely identify yourself? Who, or what, is Katherine? Which cells are you, and which are not you? How many body parts can you have replaced and still be you? 3 KATHERINE: I am not sure. 32 CHRISTIANUS: Well, you can think about that until next time. Right now, we have bigger fish to fry. 207A Moribund Mortality Proof 33 KATHERINE: We do? 34 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. We need to haul in a pair of palatable premises. So we can cook ourselves a nice conclusion. Any suggestions? 35 KATHERINE: What about 'Katherine is a human being'? 36 CHRISTIANUS: OK, that's one. Do you have another? 37 KATHERINE: 'All human beings are mortal'. 38 CHRISTIANUS: Good. So then we conclude what? 39 KATHERINE: 'Katherine is mortal'. 40 CHRISTIANUS: Not bad. It's a deductively valid argument, at least according to the modern materialist way of doing logic. 4 KATHERINE: Thank you. I am glad I could do something right. 42 CHRISTIANUS: But the proposition 'All human beings are mortal' is of course problematic. Validity doesn't 'guarantee' soundness. 43 KATHERINE: It does ring a bell, but . . . 44 CHRISTIANUS: Well, validity does not 'guarantee' that your premises are true. It only x1v:40, materialist . . . logic: When Christianus speaks of 'materialist logic' one probably should understand this to be a reference to the kind of modernized Aristotelian philosophical logic that is taught at modern 208 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 'guarantees' that if your premises are true, then your conclusion is true. So you must also show that your premises really are true. 45 KATHERINE: So how do I prove that, say, 'Katherine is a human being' is true? 46 CHRISTIANUS: It's not so easy. So to save time, let's just quickly accept the idea that you are a human being. For now. 47 KATHERINE: Thank you! You are most generous! 48 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I did have my coffee and cream now! 49 KATHERINE: And some scones! 50 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, they were really good! 5 KATHERINE: I agree. So what's next? 52 CHRISTIANUS: We need to revisit your problematic premise 'All human beings are mortal'. 53 KATHERINE: What's wrong with it? 54 CHRISTIANUS: Well, first of all we need to understand what 'is mortal' means. So if I claimed that it means, roughly, 'must die', would you then object? 209 universities, whether of an 'informal' (arguments expressed using natural languages) or 'formal' (arguments expressed using logical symbols) character. A Moribund Mortality Proof 55 KATHERINE: No. 56 CHRISTIANUS: Good. And just to confirm: you are not dead yet, are you? 57 KATHERINE: No. I am alive and bored in London, England. 58 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Yes, right! But then we have a problem. 59 KATHERINE: Why? Because I'm bored? 60 CHRISTIANUS: Ha ha! Yes! And because you're alive. 6 KATHERINE: I don't follow. 62 CHRISTIANUS: Well, according to your nonsense nothingness scenario, you can only be really alive and bored when you are in a physical body, not otherwise. Right, Miss Nothing Hill? 63 KATHERINE: Of course. 64 CHRISTIANUS: So, according to your not-sonothingnessless speculation, you cannot be dead yet. 65 KATHERINE: Right. 66 CHRISTIANUS: So it follows that your proposition 'All human beings are mortal' is not proven. 67 KATHERINE: How so? 68 CHRISTIANUS: Only if all human beings really are mortal will that proposition really be 210 Wendy's Risky Role-Play true. 69 KATHERINE: Sure. So? 70 CHRISTIANUS: But all human beings have not died yet. Including you and me and a few billion more. So we have to wait and see. Until we have scientifically verified that all humans actually do die in an orderly fashion, the proposition 'All human beings are mortal' is just an unproven assumption. 7 KATHERINE: But surely all human beings have hitherto died? 72 CHRISTIANUS: How do you know that? For sure? Have you personally witnessed the individual lives of everyone in the history of mankind and seen that they all died? 73 KATHERINE: No. 74 CHRISTIANUS: Or have you found some secret public records with authentic and comprehensive lists of all human beings that ever lived on this planet, that verify that they are all dead by now? 75 KATHERINE: No. 76 CHRISTIANUS: And is the fact that most modern Western countries have extensive birth records for their citizens a guarantee that there are no unregistered illegal immigrants roaming about in the bushes, whose ages and whereabouts are not 211A Moribund Mortality Proof tracked? 77 KATHERINE: No. 78 CHRISTIANUS: So there is no proof that they all die. In other words, the fact that some, or even most, human beings die is no proof that some other beings, born in another time and place and superficially looking like human beings, also will die. After all, perhaps some miraculous Darwinism has evolved some of us into immortals by now? 79 KATHERINE: Aren't you a little unfair? 80 CHRISTIANUS: Unfair? 8 KATHERINE: Yes. To Darwin and his followers. 82 CHRISTIANUS: Would it have been better if I said 'non-miraculous'? 83 KATHERINE: No. 84 CHRISTIANUS: Katherine: Our discussion is about rigid proofs. It's not about any pseudo-scientific Darwinian speculations. 85 KATHERINE: Are you serious? 86 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely. I am trying to make a very strong point. What you originally asked for was proof, nothing else. Proof is not just obtained by arguing positively or passionately for something, or being 'well informed' and having a thousand loosely linked arguments in your pocket. 212 Wendy's Risky Role-Play Really proving something is to establish a conclusion in a very strict and rigid manner. So what is required for a proof is not just some sloppy statistics, or some casual 'common sense' argument, or some 'general trends', or some ill-chosen analogy, or some cheap rhetoric or theatrics; it's something much more demanding. 87 KATHERINE: OK. 88 CHRISTIANUS: So when I said that I wanted proof that you are mortal on this piece of paper, I knew that it would be practically impossible for you to produce it. And so far you haven't proved it. But maybe you want another stab at it? 89 KATHERINE: No. I think it might be too difficult. 90 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But why do you think it's too difficult? 9 KATHERINE: There are so many things. 92 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, there are. But one difficulty is, of course, related to the conclusion itself: for in order to really prove that you are mortal, you first have to die yourself. 93 KATHERINE: Yes, I see what you're driving at: it's my personal dying that constitutes the ultimate proof that I am mortal. 94 CHRISTIANUS: Exactly. But that's not an unsolvable problem on its own: after all, it 213A Moribund Mortality Proof is quite possible - both in principle and in practice - to execute such a demonstration: you can either kill yourself, or you can ask someone else to do it for you. 95 KATHERINE: Yes. But I don't want to die like that. 96 CHRISTIANUS: Sure, I can understand that. So your life is actually more important to you than the proof is? 97 KATHERINE: Absolutely. Proofs are just little plays; but my own life is real and precious. 98 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, that's how many people feel. 99 KATHERINE: So now what? 00 CHRISTIANUS: One option is that we first decide to skip these boring proofs, and then order some more coffee and some of those fantastic home-baked blueberry muffins. 0 KATHERINE: And the other? 02 CHRISTIANUS: That we first order, and then decide to skip all talk about these boring proofs. That way we will get our coffee and muffins quicker. 03 KATHERINE: Sounds even better! 04 CHRISTIANUS: So let's order! 214 Wendy's Risky Role-Play SCENE XV. The Okefenokee Man-Monster  KATHERINE: Ahhhh! These blueberry muffins are sensational! I can't believe how good they are! 2 CHRISTIANUS: I know. That's why I come here a lot. 3 KATHERINE: I would too. It's a no-brainer. 4 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. 5 KATHERINE: But I have a question. And it's not about any proofs. 6 CHRISTIANUS: I hope not. Only a madman would spend more than ten minutes on those! 7 KATHERINE: So what about that Okefenokee Monster story you mentioned at the pizza place? I need some light entertainment now. 8 CHRISTIANUS: Ah, yes! Oki! He's low-key! And organically home-grown in Florida, just like you and your orange juice. 9 KATHERINE: Sounds good! 0 CHRISTIANUS: Which means it's time for the body-bomb again. Remember?  KATHERINE: Unfortunately, yes. 2 CHRISTIANUS: And what about my response to your death-and-nothingness scenario? How to better 'handle' the body-bomb? 3 KATHERINE: Sorry. I don't remember all the details. 4 CHRISTIANUS: Hmmm. Well, it was based on the idea that we are non-material spirit souls using our material bodies as instruments. And when our bodies die we simply continue our business elsewhere, without losing our 'core' individuality, perception, or ability to experience things and do things. 5 KATHERINE: That does ring a bell. 6 CHRISTIANUS: And then I said that this was a better theory than yours. For not only may it help us minimize our death anxieties in this life; it may also help us experience much more satisfaction in future lives. 7 KATHERINE: But what does this have to do with Oki? xv:10, the body-bomb: The 'bodybomb' is a condition that all human beings are subject too. See SCENE x1 ('The BodyBomb') in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, pp. 65–71; ref. supra, note 'you're late' at 1:1). xv:14, bodies as instruments: The idea is presumably that the spirit soul is the real living entity, and that he or she (i.e., the spirit soul) only temporarily, here in this (material) world, has entered into a (material) body, and uses it to act. This situation may be compared to the one in which twenty-first century commuting men and women enter into the body of a subway train, 216 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 8 CHRISTIANUS: Well, John is a friend of mine who is a professional stage actor. And he usually plays the Okefenokee Monster in the late afternoons at the local theatre here, before a crowd of very enthusiastic six-year-olds and their slightly less enthusiastic parents. 9 KATHERINE: So it's a play for kids? 20 CHRISTIANUS: No. But most grown-ups simply prefer to view it like that. So they don't have to bother trying to understand it. 2 KATHERINE: Right. 22 CHRISTIANUS: But it's not easy playing Oki. 23 KATHERINE: How come? 24 CHRISTIANUS: For in order to enter into that swampy Floridian personality and give a truly credible performance, John must always put on that same heavy, smelly, sweaty costume before he goes on stage. 25 KATHERINE: Oh my God! 26 CHRISTIANUS: And it may even be someone else's sweat! 217 bus, or car for the purpose of reaching a particular destination, after which they exit it - an experience that, in virtue of the repeated, prolonged time they spend in that vehicle, sometimes conditions them to think of that transportation instrument as 'theirs', even though they may not (ever) legally own it (e.g., 'Here comes my bus!'). For more on (material) bodies as instruments, see SCENE x11 ('The Cartesian Theatre') and SCENE x111 ('Radha's Microscope') in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, pp. 72–82; ref. supra, note 'you're late' at 1:1). The Okefenokee Man-Monster 27 KATHERINE: Ueah! 28 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. But he still manages to do it every time, even though the costume is so incredibly inconvenient to wear. And the kids love it, of course! 29 KATHERINE: And? 30 CHRISTIANUS: And when the play is over, John steps out of that dreadful, heavy, smelly suit, leaves the theatre, and returns to his real life. 3 KATHERINE: In other words, John dresses and undresses. So what? 32 CHRISTIANUS: First of all, John does not think that he is the monster; he knows that he just plays that role some afternoons. It's his temporary job to enter into that Oki outfit. Until he gets something better. 33 KATHERINE: So he plays the monster, but meanwhile experiences some demanding working conditions. Doesn't sound very shocking! 34 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe you don't think so; but I can assure you that the kids are screaming with fear whenever he goes on stage! 35 KATHERINE: I am sure they are. When are kids not screaming? Do you have a conclusion? 36 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, of course. John does not spend his days worrying about that he 218 Wendy's Risky Role-Play later in the evening will finally step out of his warm and uncomfortable monster costume. For he doesn't consider it a loss to toss it away, but a true blessing. 37 KATHERINE: I would too. 38 CHRISTIANUS: Similarly, turning to our own lives, if we just view our own bodies as costumes, with our real selves inside, we will be in a much better satisfaction-position than in your unsatisfying, soul-less scenario. 39 KATHERINE: Why? 40 CHRISTIANUS: Well, even if we know that our body-bombs are ticking and that our bodies eventually will have to go, we have little reason to worry about their departure. 4 KATHERINE: We do? 42 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. If our bodies are nothing but costumes, then departing from them will not cause us to lose our true individual selves or our abilities to experience and do things; on the contrary, their departure will reveal our real spiritual super-natures. Thus, when our current performances are over, we should, just like John, simply be very happy to step out of our smelly costumes, so that we can return to our real life somewhere else. 219The Okefenokee Man-Monster 43 KATHERINE: But what if the body-bomb explodes and John is in the costume at that very time? 44 CHRISTIANUS: In a typical play, is the actor really killed on stage when his character seemingly gets a dagger in his chest? 45 KATHERINE: No. 46 CHRISTIANUS: So then it's just part of the play. 47 KATHERINE: Which means? 48 CHRISTIANUS: When your own body-bomb goes off, you the actor, you the observer, you the spirit soul, you the self, do not die. 49 KATHERINE: You keep saying that, but I don't buy it. I mean, if someone gets a dagger in the chest, and the dagger is a fake one with some kind of push-sensitive and self-contracting blade, then it would be believable to think that the actor inside the costume is not hurt. But how could he be alive in the case of an explosion? 50 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, explosions are always difficult to fake really well. As Hollywood knows, it's hard to make them believable, without also hurting the actors or the crew at the same time, especially if it's done without any computer graphics. But as Hollywood also knows, 'difficult' doesn't mean 'impossible'; just look at ILM. 220 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 5 KATHERINE: ILM? 52 CHRISTIANUS: Industrial Light and Magic - one of the first special-effects companies. So we just have to use our imagination a little. There are so many possibilities. 53 KATHERINE: OK. Shoot. 54 CHRISTIANUS: Let's go back to the final swamp scene. This is where the handsome David mistakingly stabs the ugly but curiously kind Okefenokee Monster to death with a shiny dagger, whereupon Oki falls, seemingly thoroughly and irreversibly dead. 55 KATHERINE: What does that have to do with any explosions? 56 CHRISTIANUS: Please be patient. I am coming to that. 57 KATHERINE: OK. 58 CHRISTIANUS: Now, let's rewrite that scene so that Oki is not killed by a dagger, but by a powerful explosion instead, to really shake the audience up and produce an ending they will never forget. 59 KATHERINE: But should we really do that in front of all the kids? 60 CHRISTIANUS: Absolutely! The sooner, the better! It's part of their real, live 'prepare-yourself-for-death-NOW' education. They need to see some serious 221The Okefenokee Man-Monster alternatives to all those wishy-washy performances they experience watching their favourite, establishment-controlled TV shows. It's good for them to see more live explosions and deaths, so that they will start inquiring about what it means in terms of their own life. There's no time to lose. Kids die every day. 6 KATHERINE: But don't you think their parents will object? 62 CHRISTIANUS: I think we can handle an objection or two, if they should feel so inclined. And scandals are always good for the play economy, in any case. 63 KATHERINE: All right. 64 CHRISTIANUS: So how should we proceed with our explosive plot? Any ideas? 65 KATHERINE: What do you have? 66 CHRISTIANUS: Would it be all right if the explosion cut off the monster's head in a more or less clean way, so that it just dropped to the ground near his left foot, with the blood slowly pouring out along his left side? Or would you rather that his head exploded more like some New Year's Eve xv:73, super-kapha: In Ayurveda, persons having a kapha bodily constitution normally are 'blessed with a strong, healthy, well-developed body' but 'generally have a slow digestion and metabolism' (Lad 1998, p. 25). For more information about the kapha bodily constitution in ayurvedic 222 Wendy's Risky Role-Play crackers, followed by some high-pressure fountain of blood coming up from his aorta region? What do you think? 67 KATHERINE: I hate blood! 68 CHRISTIANUS: But it keeps you alive. How can you hate it? 69 KATHERINE: I get sick. 70 CHRISTIANUS: Well, you have to get over it. And the blood I am talking about is not real anyway. Think of it as ketchup, if you like. It doesn't matter. It's a theatre production. So, what say you? 7 KATHERINE: OK, then. I think the second scenario might be more striking from a dramatic standpoint; but it's much messier: it will be blood absolutely everywhere, including on the audience. Also, sometimes too much blood, gushing out too quickly, is less believable. So I would vote for scenario one: I think it's shocking enough for the audience to see Oki's head pop off in clean way, with the blood pouring slowly down Oki's left side. 72 CHRISTIANUS: I think so too. 73 KATHERINE: And it also fits much better 223 medicine, see also note 'mostly kapha' at 1:51 in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, pp. 6–7; ref. supra, note 'you're late' at 1:1) and note 'kapha constitution' at 111:39 in KQQ (Klintberg 2008a, p. 18). VASANT D. LAD (1998), The Complete Book of Ayurvedic Home Remedies. New York: Three Rivers Press. The Okefenokee Man-Monster with Oki's super-kapha temperament: he thinks slowly, talks slowly, and walks slowly; so why wouldn't he also bleed slowly? 74 CHRISTIANUS: Brilliant analysis! Then it's settled. Scenario one! 75 KATHERINE: Yes. 76 CHRISTIANUS: And while we're at it, do we need to add any other flying parts? Maybe his right arm could fall off too, so that there would be some blood also on his right-hand side? Wouldn't that be better, aesthetically speaking? I always hear that having the right colour balance is so important. 77 KATHERINE: Well, I am not an art director or production designer. But I just feel that we already have enough explosions and blood. 78 CHRISTIANUS: All right, you decide. But how shall we prepare the plot so that Oki's head will end up on his left side? Must we then not arrange an explosion on his right side? But if we do that, will not all his blood also end up on his right-hand side, instead of on his left, as we planned before? 79 KATHERINE: Yes, that's a worry. But maybe we can live with that? 224 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 80 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. It's not bad. 8 KATHERINE: No, it's not. 82 CHRISTIANUS: So maybe we can have the bomb hidden in a necklace, or something? Maybe Cassandra, who is an ex Vegas lion tamer, and perhaps even previously involved with Roy and his tiger, now has given the necklace as a gift to Oki to let him think that she cares about him? But secretly, of course, Cassandra just prepares to assassinate him. 83 KATHERINE: Ah! It's devilishly devious! But where did David the daggerman go? Is he expunged from the final scene? 84 CHRISTIANUS: Well, I can't really use David's skill-set in the last scene; after all, he's a daggerist, not an explosionist! So I need to let Cassandra do the really dirty work. She's much more witchy, cunning and scheming than the handsome, courageous David ever could be. 85 KATHERINE: You are certainly right! Character really is everything. As you always say. 86 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. And, just to be sure: you are still having a hard time accepting that the actor still may be alive after such a staged explosion? 87 KATHERINE: Yes. 88 CHRISTIANUS: All right. Before John leaves the 225The Okefenokee Man-Monster dressing room, Maria the makeup artist always applies some special matte black paint on his face, being especially careful not to forget his eyelids. A few moments later, after the paint has dried, he puts on a black fire-safe dress, including a hood, similar to the ones that professional racing drivers use when they race on Daytona. And then he jumps into the Oki costume itself, prepared to go. 89 KATHERINE: So what happens on stage, then? Is he really ready for a decapitation? 90 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. When Cassandra detonates Oki's necklace bomb with her remote control unit hidden in her cigarette case, the necklace really does explode as it should. But it is only a very small explosion. 9 KATHERINE: So how could that make any impression on the audience? 92 CHRISTIANUS: Since John's wireless mike is close by, it easily picks up the sound and amplifies it to a much bigger boom than it really was. Simultaneously, the Oki costume is rigged in such a way that the Oki head, which has a hinge on its lower left side, flips up from the right, over John's head, and down on his left side, still hanging on the hinge, upside down. Then John just pushes a switch inside his 226 Wendy's Risky Role-Play suit to manually release the Oki head, making it fall to the floor. 93 KATHERINE: So then the Oki head goes where it should. But what about the blood on the right hand side? 94 CHRISTIANUS: Well, the explosion also triggered the blood bags inside Oki's costume. So the blood is flowing very nicely along his right-hand side. 95 KATHERINE: But what about John's head? Is it still there? 96 CHRISTIANUS: Of course. And his face too. But it's very dark, since he has both the black hood and the black face paint on. Also, the lighting technician doesn't have a spot on Oki when it explodes; it's on Cassandra. 97 KATHERINE: What else? 98 CHRISTIANUS: Well, it's important to understand that the last scene is set in a very dark environment. Maybe it's a coal mine, or something. So John's head is not visible as a silhouette either. 99 KATHERINE: And? 00 CHRISTIANUS: You must also remember that John will be instructed to close his eyes as soon as the bomb goes off; and because of his black-painted eyelids, his eyes will, from where the audience sits, 227The Okefenokee Man-Monster almost magically appear to disappear. 0 KATHERINE: I'm sorry, but I'm not convinced. 02 CHRISTIANUS: Why not? 03 KATHERINE: Well, the apparent disappearance of John's eyes was almost believable. But I didn't like the explosion part. I thought it sounded unrealistic that John's face was so close to Oki's necklace. I don't think he could have survived that explosion without any injury, even with that hood and everything. 04 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe you are right. But what if he had a Kevlar body-armour under the Oki outfit? Wouldn't that cover it? 05 KATHERINE: Perhaps. But there's still another detail that I am not completely satisfied with. 06 CHRISTIANUS: Which one? 07 KATHERINE: Well, even if the spotlight isn't directly on John's face, it will still be possible for those sitting in the front rows to see it. So I would very much like to have no face there at all, not even a blackpainted one. How can we do that? 08 CHRISTIANUS: It's easy. We'll just have to call Andrew! 09 KATHERINE: What's his specialty? 228 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 0 CHRISTIANUS: He comes when I call him.  KATHERINE: Great. But what does he do? 2 CHRISTIANUS: He always puts on a good show. You'll see. 3 KATHERINE: I will? 4 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. When the script is done. And when we are ready to show it to you. 5 KATHERINE: So you're not ready? 6 CHRISTIANUS: I am ready. To leave. I am very, very tired. 7 KATHERINE: Sure. But what about just a few minutes summing up? 8 CHRISTIANUS: All right. Just a few minutes, then. But let's go outside. I need some fresh air! 9 KATHERINE: Me too. 20 CHRISTIANUS: After you! 229The Okefenokee Man-Monster SCENE XVI. Some Conclusive Costume Talk  CHRISTIANUS: Ah, there it is! The 'Monster Cookies' sign! How did I miss it? 2 KATHERINE: Maybe because you were so late? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe. 4 KATHERINE: OK. So what can we conclude? 5 CHRISTIANUS: Well, one thing is this. The fact that the Oki costume has been found to lie lifeless in the dressing room one morning is no proof that Oki will not return on stage in the late afternoon. For if John can't make it, his stand-in James usually always can. 6 KATHERINE: Anything else? 7 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. The fact that the Oki costume has been found to lie lifeless in the dressing room one morning is also no proof that John does not live; for John is just not in the costume at that particular time. 8 KATHERINE: But he could be dead. 9 CHRISTIANUS: Sure, he could be. But it seems unnatural to assume that he is dead just from the fact that he is not in the Oki costume in the morning time. 0 KATHERINE: Why?  CHRISTIANUS: Because John is one of the lead actors; and he comes and goes every day. But he never comes before lunch. So it's nothing abnormal or unnatural about the fact that the Oki costume can be found to lie lifeless in the dressing room in the morning time; it always does! John just likes to sleep in. 2 KATHERINE: So what is the 'moral' of this analogy, if there is one? Should I think, whenever I see a dead body, that the dead body is actually just a costume? 3 CHRISTIANUS: Yes, at least if you want to do it the satisfactionist way. And there's more. 4 KATHERINE: More? 5 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. It's not just when you see a dead body that you should think 'costume'; you should think 'costume' when you see any body - lifeless or animated. 6 KATHERINE: Your theory is a little hard to digest; it sounds very unscientific. 7 CHRISTIANUS: Of course it's unscientific; it's built on a play! Why would scientists be interested in talking about such things? 8 KATHERINE: Don't ask me! 9 CHRISTIANUS: You have to try to understand things without being attached to mate231Some Conclusive Costume Talk rialist theories. You have to see things in such a way that you can enable your personal satisfaction. In other words, if you're not satisfied with other people's theories and world-views, then just throw them out! 20 KATHERINE: So if I am not satisfied with your theory, why should I adopt it? 2 CHRISTIANUS: I am not talking about the mind's satisfaction; I am talking about the spirit soul's satisfaction. The self. 22 KATHERINE: What are you saying? 23 CHRISTIANUS: I am saying that the greatest enemy to real satisfaction and to self-realization is your own mind. It always wants to argue. So you have to put it in place, so that you can start your satisfaction journey. 24 KATHERINE: How? 25 CHRISTIANUS: We just did it, right? The Mortality Proof. Where we both clearly saw that you could not prove that you are a mortal before you are dead. xv1:34, No, I'm not: Katherine here not only seems to struggle against the idea of being ostrich-like, but also against the idea of going to the London Zoo - an attitude that Christianus also could have identified as being remarkably similar to the behaviour of certain ostriches. For after that popular ostrich at the Regent's Park Zoological Gardens was 'loved to death' in 1873 and a dissection of it showed that it had 'met its end by twenty-one penny pieces which it could not digest, although it was an ostrich' (Walford 1878, p. 286), there was a sud232 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 26 KATHERINE: Well . . . 27 CHRISTIANUS: And then, using your coldhearted nothingness scenario, we saw that you could not do it after you are dead, either. 28 KATHERINE: Cold-hearted? 29 CHRISTIANUS: So the conclusion is that your nothingness scenario is useless. 30 KATHERINE: Not to me. 3 CHRISTIANUS: That's only because you don't want to see the truth. You're one of those ostriches at the Zoo. 32 KATHERINE: No, I'm not. 33 CHRISTIANUS: Or on the way to the Zoo, then. 34 KATHERINE: No, I'm not. 35 CHRISTIANUS: Of course you are. You don't want to jeopardize your girlish little dreams about a cute little life, as a cute little wife of a cute little knight, whose fearless fight on a moonlit night made all your freight go out of sight. 233 den shortage of ostriches. So when the Prince of Wales returned to England from his India adventures in the spring of 1876, he brought with him 'three large ostriches' (Wheeler 1876, p. 363; ref. supra, note 'Monday' at 111:105), all of which seemingly ended up at the Zoological Society's Gardens (ILN 1876h, p. 367; ILN 1876i, p. 518). But those ostriches had not been very co-operative to get there. Just getting them on board the Serapis proved to be difficult, when that ship had anchored off Aden to take in two hundred tons of Some Conclusive Costume Talk 36 KATHERINE: How poetic. 37 CHRISTIANUS: Thank you. So here's the deal. If you adopt my scenario, you can verify that you once were a mortal. For when you leave your body at the time of death, you can see, with your spiritual senses and consciousness, your dead, cold, lifeless body lying there, whether on the operating table, or under a 24-feet truck in the middle of the road. 38 KATHERINE: Don't talk like that! 39 CHRISTIANUS: Why not? Does it go badly with your chic Gucci bag? Or your colourful haute couture Chanel dress? 40 KATHERINE: I love my handbag and my dress. Unlike your outfit, mine has style. 4 CHRISTIANUS: I just have a different one. 42 KATHERINE: There is no doubt about that! 43 CHRISTIANUS: In any case, my scenario is much more attractive than yours. coal on Sunday, 19 March 1876 (Wheeler 1876, p. 363). As seen in the front-page illustration in the Illustrated London News called 'The Royal Visit to India: The Voyage Home – Getting Ostriches on Board at Aden' (ILN 1876g, p. 337), four sailors were needed to carry one hard-struggling ostrich up the ladder to the ship with 'considerable difficulty' (Wheeler 1876, p. 363); and there is no indication that the other two were any less 'huge' or 'struggling' (ILN 1876g, p. 354). ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876g), Saturday, 8 April 1876, vol. 68, no. 1915. ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876h), Saturday, 15 April 1876, vol. 68, no. 1916. ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS (1876i), Saturday, 27 May 1876, vol. 68, no. 1922. EDWARD WALFORD (1878), Old and New London. A Narrative of Its History, Its 234 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 44 KATHERINE: Why? It's not the least romantic or colourful. 45 CHRISTIANUS: Yours isn't either. In your scenario, you cannot ever verify anything about your own mortality, neither before death nor after. But in my scenario, I can directly verify, with my own spiritual consciousness, as soon as I am dead, that I once was a mortal. 46 KATHERINE: So what does that prove? 47 CHRISTIANUS: It doesn't prove anything conclusively, on its own, of course, just as any argument doesn't prove anything conclusively on its own - other than, perhaps, that it was possible to formulate that argument. So it strongly indicates, in conjunction with other pieces of information, that my scenario is more real than yours, since one can actually know more about oneself and one's body. 48 KATHERINE: But what if I am blind? What if I 235 People, and its Places, vol. 6: The Western and Northern Suburbs. Illustrated with numerous engravings from the most authentic sources. London, Paris & New York: Cassell Petter & Galpin. xv1:47, scenario . . . more real: Christianus's point is apparently about 'reality' and the possibility of knowledge. He seems to suggest that the degree of 'realness' of a scenario is related to the (presumably gradualistic) level of knowledge (or potential knowledge) that one may have of objects in that scenario. So, for example, if an individual potentially can have more knowledge of the body from a spiritual 'bodyand-soul' scenario than from a purely material 'body-but-no-soul' scenario, then, potentially, the spiritual scenario would be more 'real' than the purely material one. Some Conclusive Costume Talk can't see? 49 CHRISTIANUS: Why would you be blind after death? Why would John be blind after he takes off his Okefenokee monster suit? Who would be foolish enough to hire a blind actor? 50 KATHERINE: No, no. I mean blind here, on earth. Now. In this life. 5 CHRISTIANUS: How do you mean? 52 KATHERINE: If I were blind since birth, and the sky were blue, I would never be able to prove, with my own perception, that the sky is blue. Why, then, would I therefore have to conclude that the sky is not blue? 53 CHRISTIANUS: You wouldn't. 54 KATHERINE: I wouldn't? 55 CHRISTIANUS: Well, since you are a little netineti philosopher, maybe you would. But I wouldn't, that's for sure. 56 KATHERINE: Why not? 57 CHRISTIANUS: All people are not blind, are they? 58 KATHERINE: No, they aren't. 59 CHRISTIANUS: So some people - in fact most people - will be able to confirm by their own, direct perception that the sky is blue. If it really is blue, that is. 236 Wendy's Risky Role-Play 60 KATHERINE: OK? 6 CHRISTIANUS: So the proposition 'the sky is blue' can be verified in a very direct manner by those who are not blind. 62 KATHERINE: But? 63 CHRISTIANUS: But, in your nothingness scenario, the proposition 'I am mortal' can never be directly verified by anyone. So that scenario is extremely unsatisfying, from an aesthetic point of view. 64 KATHERINE: So you're saying? 65 CHRISTIANUS: You must abandon your nothingness scenario. 66 KATHERINE: I don't want to. 67 CHRISTIANUS: Sure. But do you have a choice? 68 KATHERINE: How do you mean? 69 CHRISTIANUS: Well, if you want to be unreasonable, you can. Is that your brilliant plan? 70 KATHERINE: No. 7 CHRISTIANUS: Or unintelligent? 72 KATHERINE: Of course not. 73 CHRISTIANUS: Or unhappy, then? 74 KATHERINE: No. But can't we meet tomorrow to talk more about this? 75 CHRISTIANUS: No, I have Wendy. 237Some Conclusive Costume Talk 76 KATHERINE: Oh, right. What about Sunday? 77 CHRISTIANUS: Sorry. Sunday is Sandy-day. 78 KATHERINE: Sandy? 79 CHRISTIANUS: Yes. She's a really nice girl. Very co-operative. And sexy. 80 KATHERINE: So when do you have time? Monday? Tuesday? 8 CHRISTIANUS: No, probably not until the end of the week. 82 KATHERINE: What about Thursday, then? 83 CHRISTIANUS: Maybe. Email me on Wednesday, and we'll see. OK? 84 KATHERINE: OK. 85 CHRISTIANUS: But I have to run now. 86 KATHERINE: Sure. Bye! 87 CHRISTIANUS: Bye. 238 Wendy's Risky Role-Play\n\nISSN 654-6296 (print) . ISSN 654-6318 (online) http://www.philosophicalplays.com"}
{"meta": {"title": "What Zif", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/article", "creator": "Dohrn, Daniel", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "In a series of articles, David Barnett (2006, 2009, 2010) has developed a general theory of conditionals. The grand aim is to reconcile the two main rivals: a suppositional and a truth-conditional view (Barnett 2006, 521). While I confine my critical discussion to counterfactuals, I will give some hints how they might spell trouble for his suppositional view in general.", "date": "manuscript", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/DOHWZ", "language": "zz", "datestamp": "2019-06-26T07:15:51Z"}, "text": "Discussion: What Zif? In a series of articles, David Barnett (2006, 2009) has developed a highly original general theory of conditionals. The grand aim is to reconcile two main rivals: a suppositional and a truth-conditional view (Barnett 2006, 521). When he extends his approach to counterfactuals (Barnett 2010 in this journal), he boldly combines a probability-based view which characterizes counterfactual reasoning by the probabilistic relationship between the antecedent and the consequent (cf. Edgington 1995) with a truth-conditional view. He aims at integrating as well the insights of a Lewisian nearness analysis as the virtues of the traditional metalinguistic approach according to which the truth of a counterfactual depends on the antecedent entailing the consequent given certain further assumptions. In sum, if Barnett is successful, he overcomes the main boundaries by which the philosophical debate has been marked so far. While I confine my critical discussion to counterfactuals, I will give some hints how they might spell trouble for his suppositional view in general. Barnett's method is uncommon. After stipulating 'zif', he forwards a challenge: Anyone who rejects that zif would have been if faces the obvious challenge: to find a relevant difference between our entrenched practices with 'if ' and our inchoate practices with 'zif '.(Barnett 2010) Since 'zif' is alleged to be 'if', I will translate Barnett's 'zif' claims to 'if'-claims where appropriate. Here are some rules of 'zif': Zif Probability A zif-statement is n% probable iff what is stated by the statement is made n% probable by what is supposed by it. ... 2 Zif Truth A zif-statement is true iff what is supposed by the statement entails what is stated by it. Zif Falsity A zif-statement is false iff what is supposed by the statement is inconsistent with what is stated by it.(Barnett 2010, 279) In four sections, I will address the following misgivings: 1. Barnett cannot provide an adequate nearness constraint for everyday counterfactuals. 2. Since Barnett's view does not fare better with his prime example than the standard possible worlds approach, he does nothing to rule out the latter. 3. His further linguistic evidence does not withstand critical scrutiny. 4. It is completely open how to modify Barnett's overall suppositional approach to indicatives (Barnett 2006) such as to integrate his view of counterfactuals. 1. Probability and Closeness Most everyday counterfactuals are not true but only probable according to Barnett's criteria. In order to account for suppositional probability ascriptions, Barnett introduces Conditional Counterfactual Probabilities: CCP's appear to measure the stability of features and connections in the world. Suppose for illustration that a large number of children have been surveyed and that 95% of them like candy. The question arises whether this statistic reflects a relatively stable connection between being a child and liking candy, or whether it is purely accidental. ... 3 The relatively stable connections give way to ones that are more stable, more general, and more basic, until ultimately we reach the brute stabilities, including the fundamental laws of nature. (Barnett 2010, 278) This conception leads to a dilemma. The first alternative is that stability is something along the following lines: A feature or connection is the more probable the higher the proportion of worlds at which it holds (cf. Edgington 1995, 308). This is an insufficient basis for assessing probabilities of counterfactual suppositions. Consider: If I had got up 5 minutes earlier, I would have caught the train Assume that my probability of reaching the train on the counterfactual supposition that I get up 5 minutes earlier is high. But it does not entirely owe this to the stability of features in the world; the accidental fact how far from the station I am plays a crucial role. Even very stable relationships may fail to hold in arbitrarily many metaphysically possible situations. What is responsible for the probability of a counterfactual is not their stability tout court but their stability relative to sufficiently close situations. So the second alternative is to impose some nearness constraint on probability. Probabilities are assessed given things are as they actually are as far as compatible with the antecedent. But in contrast to standard analyses of counterfactuals, closeness or preservation of actual facts is not built into 'zif' by default. Nor is it implicit in Barnett's notion of probability. He has two soldiers enact the following flash drama: Smith: Zif she hadn't stepped on that mine, she would have made it across. Jones: I doubt it. For suppose that she hadn't stepped on that mine. We must ask ourselves: what is the mostly likely way for this to have come about? Perhaps the initial conditions of 4 the universe had been different; in which case it is highly unlikely that she, or this minefield, would ever have existed... Smith: You are extremely uncharitable. Was it not obvious from our context that what I meant was that, zif she hadn't stepped on that mine and things had been as similar as possible to actual, up to that point, she would have made it across? Jones: Well, in that case, she probably would have made it across. From now on, please say exactly what you mean.(Barnett 2010, 285) Replacing 'zif' by 'if', I find Jones' reaction not merely uncharitable but just infelicitous. In order to evaluate Smith's statement, we have to consider the actual situation modulo the soldier not stepping on a mine (however this is to be cashed out). Jones does not understand how everyday counterfactuals work. So the dialogue strongly counts against Barnett's analysis of 'if'. Barnett would have to add a default nearness constraint to accommodate intuitions and to get a neat conception of probability for counterfactuals. Barnett suggests that instead of a nearness supposition, some zif-statements may be subject to a subjunctive free-will supposition (cf. Kvart 1992, 141) zif the soldier had freely chosen to step just to the left of where she actually freely chose to step, the events leading up to this choice would probably have been just as they actually were, for there is no reason to think they would have been different, and there is some reason to think they would have been the same.(Barnett 2010, 287) Now there is a crucial point at which Barnett misses 'zif' and tacitly replaces it by 'if'. Without a nearness constraint that privileges the way things are, nothing ensures that things 'would probably have been just as they actually were'(cf. Lewis 1994, 480). 5 Barnett provides eight clues where the 'zif'-linguist can see that the standard account of counterfactuals does not apply, neither to 'zif' nor to 'if'. Clue #1 is Barnett's argument against building a nearness constraint into the meaning of the counterfactual: the outsider might investigate whether explicitly adding a nearness-condition to the antecedent of a zif-statement has any effect on our evaluation of the statement. On the nearest-world hypothesis, it should not. ... (5a) Zif hamsters had wings, everything else would be as similar as possible to actual. (5b) Zif hamsters had wings and everything else were as similar as possible to actual, everything else would be as similar as possible to actual.(Barnett 2010, 288) (5b) is necessary, (5a) is not. To Barnett, this is not reconcilable with (5a) being subject to an implicit nearness constraint. But here is the rub: The proper test for a nearness constraint is not to ask whether for any world of evaluation w, zif hamsters had wings, everything else would be as similar as possible to the actual world @; rather we would have to ask whether for any world w, zif hamsters had wings, everything else would be as similar as possible to w. The rigid 'actual' pins down the nearness condition in the consequent of (5a) and in the antecedent and consequent of (5b) to the way things are in our world. In order for Barnett's argument to succeed, the standard nearness truth condition for counterfactuals would have to be: For a world of evaluation w, a counterfactual A □→ C is true iff C at some A-world which is closer to actuality (our world) than any A-world such that ~C. But in fact, the standard truth condition is this: 6 For a world of evaluation w, a counterfactual A □→ C is true iff C at some A-world which is closer to w than any A-world such that ~C. Ad clue #2: One of the alleged virtues of Barnett's approach is that it accounts for counterfactuals with impossible antecedents such as: (6a) Zif the truths of fundamental physics were discoverable by a priori conceptual analysis, particle accelerators would be superfluous. ...we judge some zif-statements to be about impossible scenarios, and our confidence in such statements is sometimes low and sometimes high. This does not comport with the hypothesis that zif-statements with impossible antecedents are vacuously true (or vacuously false).(Barnett 2010, 289) Yet Barnett does not say how conditional counterfactual probabilities may apply to impossible situations. What we would need is a detailed account in how far the supposed impossible circumstances interfere with stable features of the world and in how far they do not, as it is given e.g. by Nolan's nearness account of impossible worlds (Nolan 1997). So what remains is that counterfactuals with metaphysically impossible antecedents are true iff the antecedent logically entails the consequent; and they are false iff the antecedent is inconsistent with the antecedent. Or, if metaphysical entailment is at stake, such counterfactuals are trivially true given ex falso quodlibet. Nothing in between. We are left without any clue how to deal with (6a). No advantage compared to the standard account according to which all counterfactuals with impossible antecedents are vacuously true. 7 2. Constraints on Categorical Statements Clue #3-6 are derived from 4 principles that Barnett takes to hold for categorical statements but not for 'zif': Clue #3: However confident one is that S, one should be at least as confident that there is an answer to the question of whether S. Clue # 4: On the supposition that there is no answer to the question of whether a is F, one should have zero confidence that a might be F. Clue #5: However confident one is that S, one should be equally confident that it is true that S. Clue #6: Intuitively, it cannot be objectively incorrect to assign probability 1 to a categorical statement and objectively incorrect to assign probability 0 to the statement.(cf. Barnett 2010, 290292)i Barnett's argument entirely rests on applying the analysis of 'zif' to one example, not on any further piece of independent evidence: (Goldilocks) If there were a Goldilocks girl, she would like candy. To Barnett, (Goldilocks) is neither true nor false; the antecedent does neither entail nor contradict the consequent. So there is no answer to the question whether (Goldilocks). The girl might like candy and she might not like candy. Yet assessing probabilities gives rise to a high confidence that the girl would like candy. Now there is no reason within the standard analysis why #3-#6 should not hold for counterfactuals. So Barnett's argument depends on his analysis of (Goldilocks) being superior 8 to the standard analysis. Let us compare Barnett's results to the standard analysis. It does not sound that unconvincing that (Goldilocks) is neither true nor false. How can the standard analysis accommodate that? I think Lewis would emphasize that (Goldilocks) is vague. Contrary to the first appearance, it is very different from everyday counterfactuals. In contrast to 'If I had got up earlier today...' which solidly hooks into a concrete actual situation, (Goldilocks) does not give us enough to envisage a concrete scenario. For instance, when and where does Goldilocks live? In Lewis' default nearness analysis, a small miracle or inconspicuous divergence from actual facts would have to bring about the antecedent (Lewis 1986). But where is this divergence to be located? What does it look like? Here is Lewis on vagueness: Thus we account for such pairs of counterfactuals as Quine's If Caesar had been in command [in Korea] he would have used the atom bomb. Versus If Caesar had been in command he would have used catapults. ... I could ... call on context rather to resolve part of the vagueness of comparative similarity in a way favourable to the truth of one counterfactual or the other.(Lewis 1973, 66-67) In the same vein, (Goldilocks) may call for further ways of cashing out the story. In some of them it comes true, in some it comes out false. There are further possibilities of interpreting (Goldilocks): We may reckon a world where a Goldilocks girl likes candy more similar than a world where she does not. For instance, we may say that the latter world instantiates less high probability properties; after all, girls usually like candy (cf. Williams 2008). Then (Goldilocks) comes true. Or we insist that worlds where she likes candy and worlds where she 9 does not are equally close. Then the Goldilock case resembles chancy situations the paradigm of which is the throwing of a dice. In the standard analysis, both 'If a dice had been thrown, it would have landed six' and 'If a dice had been thrown, it would have not landed six' are false. Analogously, both 'would like candy' and 'would not like candy' turn out false. Nevertheless, we might feel inclined to ascribe a high probability to a Goldilocks girl liking candy. This is reflected in our accepting as true (Goldilocksp) If there were a Goldilocks girl, she would probably like candy (cf. Lewis 1986, 63-65) and (Goldilocksm) If there were a Goldilocks girl, she might/might not like candy In sum, the standard analysis can accommodate any plausible intuition with regard to (Goldilocks) or a close variant of it being probable, true, false, neither true nor false. Clue #3- #6 do not give us any independent evidence for or against Barnett's view. 3 Further Linguistic Evidence 3.1 The Need for Qualifying Clue #7 ...there is no need to qualify the proposition that Jones is the murderer –by, say, 'probably', 'definitely', or 'possibly' in order for a categorical statement of it to be significant. By contrast, subjunctive contents stated relative to subjunctive do require qualification for their statements to be significant.(Barnett 2010, 295) 10 I disagree. Firstly, a normal categorical statement does not need qualification. A counterfactual does not either. But in both cases, we tend to be in a quandary when pressed: A: Jones is the murderer/The glass would have shattered if dropped. B: Definitely, probably, or possibly? Normally, on the one hand A will feel pressed by her utterance to accept one of the options B presents; but on the other hand, she will often hesitate. 'Definitely' might sound too strong, 'probably' too weak. This, I guess, is due to a certain vagueness and intransparency of the threshold of certainty or vindication at stake in our attitudes such as belief or explicit acceptance and the threshold required by the qualification.ii At least there is no stronger commitment to qualification involved in counterfactuals than in categorical statements. Secondly, to Barnett 'definitely' requires entailment. Thus, were 'zif' if, the following should be infelicitous: A: Had I got up five minutes earlier, I should definitely have reached the train. B: Definitely? After all, five minutes is not much, and the way is far. A (who happens to be a sprinting champion): Definitely! But this dialogue sounds perfectly in order. In contrast, what would definitely be infelicitous is the ziffy: # B: Come on, what about a sudden volcano eruption or a break in natural laws? You should mind your words. Just add 'probably' (and a nearness constraint) instead of this overconscious 'definitely'! 11 Furthermore, even when we hesitate to call a chancy counterfactual definitely true, we might not hesitate to call it true when qualified: Ed: The glass would have shattered if dropped. Ella: Is that so? Ed: Well, that much is true: (a) It would probably have shattered if dropped / If the glass had been dropped, there would definitely have been a high chance of its breaking when dropped. Although Barnett might be able to accommodate (a),iii he seems unable to accommodate (b). Compare the overwhelming evidential impact of these simple examples to Barnett's: Ella: Suppose the glass had fallen! Ed: It definitely would have shattered. Ella: Well, I hate to be a stickler, but I don't think it's right to say that it definitely would have shattered. For, as unlikely as it sounds, a perfect gust of wind could have brought the glass to a gentle landing. ... just think of a couple of the ways that the glass could have fallen. It could have fallen due to a subtle difference in the initial conditions of the universe, say, one that led to your reactions being a bit slower than they actually were. This difference could also have led to the existence of a perfect gust of wind. Another way that the glass could have fallen is for there to have been a subtle difference in the laws of nature, say, one that led to the glass's accelerating slightly faster than it actually did.(Barnett 2010, 280) I think our intuitive grip on such an example is loose. No one likes sticklers. Let us apply the standard analysis to get rid of them. Note that by Barnett's lights, Ella could as well appeal to 12 a huge difference in laws of nature. Such circumstances are definitely too far-fetched to count as closest antecedent worlds. The Lewisian standard nearness analysis eschews them as well as a subtle difference in the initial conditions of the universe and Ella's subtle difference in the laws of nature. In contrast, Lewis' standard analysis cannot make short work with certain very improbable chance processes, for instance the sudden gust of wind. They are candidates for closest antecedent worlds. There is a huge debate on that (cf. Williams 2008). Here I think the standard analysis is perfectly in tune with our intuitions. We tend to neglect certain chance processes (cf. Hájek unpublished). But when we are pressed, we are in a quandary how to deal with them. But just in case you like sticklers, I offer a rival near-standard analysis. Counterfactuals are strict conditionals that bring about universal quantification over a contextually confined domain of worlds; yet they are very sensitive to shifts in local context (cf. Gillies 2007): We are prone to charitably open the range of possibilities considered such as to even accommodate differences in initial conditions of the universe and violations of laws. The context of possibilities considered broadens with the dialogue going on. So Ed is right at the beginning. But under pressure from Ella, context begins to shift until it comprises the most far-fetched alternatives. I doubt that there is a more eligible way to handle Barnett's extremely artificial dialogue. If I feel any intuitive pull, then it is to accept Ed's initial statement as perfectly in order. This is what Barnett denies and what is accepted by the other analyses. 3.2 Further Linguistic Evidence: On Suppositions Denoting Situations Clue #8 provides further linguistic evidence. While 'when' and 'where' denote times and places, a counterfactual 'if' does not denote a situation that is supposed to obtain. To 13 substantiate the difference, Barnett notes there are six places where 'probable' can be inserted into a counterfactual: (10a) It is probable that hamsters would fly, zif they had wings (10b) It is probable, zif hamsters had wings, that they would fly (10c) Zif hamsters had wings, it is probable that they would fly (10d) Zif hamsters had wings, that they would fly is probable (10e) That hamsters would fly, zif they had wings, is probable (10f) That hamsters would fly is probable, zif they had wings.(Barnett 2010, 297) In contrast, there are only four places where 'probable' can be inserted into 'when' or 'where'-statements: (13a) It is probable that I will live where Sharon lives (13b) It is probable, where Sharon lives, that I will live (13c) Where Sharon lives, it is probable that I will live (13d) That I will live where Sharon lives is probable. The remaining two combinations are awkward, to say the least: (13e) Where Sharon lives, that I will live is probable (13f) That I will live is probable, where Sharon lives.(Barnett 2010, 298) I do not deem this difference very significant. Note that for instance the German equivalent of (10), Es ist wahrscheinlich, dass Hamster flögen, wenn sie Flügel hätten, allows 5 variants at best (no equivalent to 10d). And try the following instead of (13e) and (f): 14 (13e ) Where Sharon lives, there that I will live is probable / at that place that I will live is probable. (13f ) There/at that place that I will live is probable, where Sharon lives. This is not elegant, but can one be sufficiently confident that it is infelicitous to build a deep distinction between 'if' on the one and 'where' and 'when' on the other hand on this verdict? At least concerning (13e ) I have got mixed reactions from native speakers. Barnett gives further evidence that 'if'-sentences do not denote a situation: ...whereas 'the time when Sharon leaves' and 'the place where Sharon lives' are grammatical, 'the hypothetical situation zif Sharon had left' is not.(Barnett 2010, 298, cf. 2006, 528-529) Yet there is a rough and ready standard explanation: 'When' and 'where' in 'the time where', 'the place where' act like pronouns referring to a certain time or place. Their role in (13) is derived from this function. In contrast, the original function of 'if' is to act as a quantifier over possible worlds. 4. Integrating Counterfactuals into the Suppositional Approach Even granting that Barnett's account provides adequate conditions for assessing counterfactuals, we may ask how it fits into his general picture of supposition. Barnett rejects that 'zif' denotes a situation; yet he accepts that there is denotation in play: conditional denotation. An A-situation is denoted provided there is one. If A is false, nothing is denoted: 15 Joe says, [(Pope)]'Zif the Pope visited yesterday, then we will have a good year'. The outsider responds, 'What do you mean then we will have a good year? There is no then, because there was no visit by the Pope'. To which Joe responds: 'Surely you must recognize the possibility that you are wrong-that the Pope did in fact visit yesterday. Suppose this is so. Then we will have a good year. When I say 'then', I only aim to be talking about a situation in which the Pope visited yesterday conditional on there being such a situation. No Pope, no aim.'(Barnett 2006, 529) 'Then' in (Pope) denotes something conditionally. Yet putting into abeyance my above criticism of clue #8, I do not see any reason why the linguistic evidence for #8 does not apply as well to indicative suppositions.iv But by Barnett's lights, these suppositions do denote something (albeit conditionally). How can Barnett's template for indicatives be transferred to counterfactual situations? Consider (Pope ) If the pope had visited yesterday, then we would have a good year. Straightforward application of the template for indicatives gives: When the antecedent is false, there is nothing to be denoted by 'then'. 'No pope, no aim'; nothing to be aimed at; still there is 'an absent attempt at reference rather than a failed attempt.'(Barnett 2006, 529-530)v How are we to understand an act which amounts to nothing but an absent attempt at denoting whatever 'then' is to denote? What does it mean to aim at something when it is at the same time conveyed that there is nothing to be aimed at, not even a seeming aim? The only way of making sense of such an act is to make the absent attempt parasitic on the success case: A obtains; at least it is somehow open whether A obtains. As Joe responds: 'You must somehow recognize the possibility that you are wrong.' Thus the problem of accounting for 16 suppositional statements when A is false becomes more grievous in the counterfactual case. It would seem odd to say that for any genuine counterfactual (with actually false antecedent), 'then' fails to denote; there is nothing but an absent attempt at reference. But then what does 'then' in (pope ) stand for? Barnett criticizes that the proponent of 'zif' being a binary truth-functional connective must ask what the truth value of 'zif A, C' is under the supposition ...that it is false that A. This amounts to a request to evaluate whether C while supposing not just that A but also that it is not the case that A. And this is a request that we cannot satisfy. Hence our response: 'We are at a loss as to how to respond, for we are unable to evaluate the statement under the supposition that it is false that A'.(Barnett 2006, 536) Yet this seems precisely to be what the suppositional template demands when we evaluate a counterfactual. What remains is that nothing seems ever to be stated by a genuine counterfactual, not even C under the supposition that A. So for any counterfactual, we 'are unable to evaluate the statement under the supposition that it is false that A'. To be sure, Barnett reminds us: 'Keep in mind that our attention is limited to indicatives.'(Barnett 2006, 529) Yet when his attention widens, he would owe an account of 'then' in (pope ) that could complete his account of 'then' in (pope). A similar problem: 'When we believe under a supposition, we aim at the truth, but we are only committed to this goal on the condition that the supposition obtains.'(Barnett 2006, 542) If this were transferred to counterfactuals, it would seem that one incurs no commitment at all by them. So it remains open how to accommodate counterfactual suppositions within Barnett's overall approach. There are further difficulties of transferring the suppositional view of indicatives to counterfactuals. A 'zif'-statement 'zif A, C' is true iff C is true on the supposition that A. Provided we take this as a model for counterfactuals as well, C would be true on the 17 supposition that A iff A entails C; then the probability of C being true on the supposition that A is 1. 'Zif A, C' is n% probable iff: C being true on the supposition that A is n% probable.vi But for the counterfactual, the condition of C being true on the supposition that A is that A entails C. If A does not entail C, the probability that it does entail C is 0. So how can the probability of 'zif A were the case, C would be', i.e. of C being true on the supposition that A ever be different from 0 or 1?vii Negation causes trouble, too: A statement that it is not the case that, zif A, C is a statement of a unique thing-that it is not the case that C-within the scope of the supposition that A.(Barnett 2006, 546) If we apply this to counterfactuals, from our accepting 'It is not the case that if the coin is/were thrown, it will/would fall heads' it seems to follow that if the coin is/were thrown, it will/would not be the case that it falls heads. So it will/would not fall heads. But we deny that if the coin is/were thrown, it will/would not fall heads. Barnett, David. (2006) 'Zif is If', Mind 115, 519-565. Barnett, David. (2009) 'The Myth of the Categorical Counterfactual'. Philosophical Studies 144, 281–96. Barnett, David. (2010) 'Zif Would Have Been If: A Suppositional View of Counterfactuals', Nous 44, 269-304. DeRose, Keith. (2010) 'The Conditionals of Deliberation', Mind 119, 1-42. 18 Edgington, Dorothy. (1995) 'On conditionals', Mind 104, 235-330. Gillies, Anthony. (2007) 'Counterfactual Scorekeeping', Linguistics and Philosophy 30, 329360. Hajek, Alan. 'Most Counterfactuals are False', unpublished Manuscript. Kvart, Igal. (1992) 'Counterfactuals', Erkenntnis 36, 139-179. Lewis, David. (1973) Counterfactuals, Oxford: Blackwell. Lewis, David. (1986) 'Counterfactual dependence and time's arrow' and 'Postscripts to \"Counterfactual dependence and time's arrow\"'. in Philosophical Papers II, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 32-52, 52-66. Lewis, David. (1994) 'Humean Supervenience Debugged', Mind 103, 473-490. Nolan, Daniel. (1997) 'Impossible Worlds: A Modest Approach', Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 38, 535-572. Schnieder, Benjamin. (2010) 'Expressivism concerning Epistemic Modals', The Philosophical Quarterly 60, 601-615. Williams, Robert G. (2008) 'Chances, Counterfactuals, and Similarity', Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 78, 385-420. 19 i Ad #6: Take Lewis' objective chances (Lewis 1994). We are going to throw a coin. It seems objectively correct to assign a credence of 0,5 to the statement that it will fall heads. It is objectively as incorrect to assign probability 1 as probability 0. ii For intricacies of modals such as 'perhaps', 'surely' cf. Schnieder (2010) and the literature he gives. iii There are several uncertainties When is a counterfactual assertable? Does it have to be ziftrue (by entailment) or merely zif-probable? At least the first alternative amounts to a major revision of our practice. Furthermore, what does qualification achieve? 'Definitely' might change truth conditions: A 'definitely'-counterfactual is true iff the corresponding counterfactual is true, false if the corresponding counterfactual fails to be true. And perhaps a 'probably'-counterfactual is true iff the corresponding unamended counterfactual is true or probable and false iff it is improbable. This would allow to accommodate Ed's (a). But what if Ed begins: Well, that much is definitely true: ...And how does the proposal square with the original 'zif'-rules which require entailment for truth? iv Consider the indicative: (10a ) It is probable that hamsters fly, zif they have wings... There is no 'situation zif Sharon has left'. v Edgington has it that when A is false, nothing is asserted (Edgington 1995, 289). In contrast, Barnett insists: '...one who asserts that, zif A, C, asserts something -namely, that Cregardless of whether A.'(Barnett 2006, 543) Regardless of whether A, C is asserted under the supposition that A. vi 'How likely is it to be true that, zif this fair coin is flipped, it will land heads?' To which we respond: 'Fifty percent'(Barnett 2006, 540) vii For a parallel cf. DeRose (2010, 12-13)."}
{"meta": {"title": "What memory is", "type": "info:eu-repo/semantics/article", "creator": "Klein, Stan", "subject": "Philosophy", "description": "I argue that our current practice of ascribing the term “ memory ” to mental states and processes lacks epistemic warrant. Memory, according to the “received view”, is any state or process that results from the sequential stages of encoding, storage and retrieval. By these criteria, memory, or its footprint, can be seen in virtually every mental state we are capable of having. This, I argue, stretches the term to the breaking point. I draw on phenomenological, historical and conceptual considerations to make the case that an act of memory entails a direct, non-inferential feeling of re-acquaintance with one’s past. It does so by linking content retrieved from storage with autonoetic awareness during retrieval. On this view, memory is not the content of experience, but the manner in which that content is experienced. I discuss some theoretical and practical implications and advantages of adopting this more nuanced view of memory. -/-", "date": "2015", "identifier": "oai:philarchive.org/rec/KLEWMI", "language": "en", "datestamp": "2019-06-27T06:30:39Z"}, "text": "CrossWires The article below is the first in what we hope will be a series-which we will call CrossWires. In this series, articles will be published that 'invite' response or commentary. We will be happy to receive such replies and, subject to review, publish them as articles in WIREs Cognitive Science. We will, on a case-by-case basis, solicit replies, but in all cases, we will be open to submitted replies from any interested reader. The point of this feature is to start a conversation- a somewhat open-ended one. Stan Klein's article raises fundamental questions about how we use the term memory, and what we take it to mean, or should take it to mean. If you are interested in addressing these issues in our pages, get in touch with me via e-mail: nadel@u.arizona.edu. We hope you enjoy this new feature. What memory is Stanley B. Klein∗ I argue that our current practice of ascribing the term 'memory' to mental states and processes lacks epistemic warrant. Memory, according to the 'received view', is any state or process that results from the sequential stages of encoding, storage, and retrieval. By these criteria, memory, or its footprint, can be seen in virtually every mental state we are capable of having. This, I argue, stretches the term to the breaking point. I draw on phenomenological, historical, and conceptual considerations to make the case that an act of memory entails a direct, non-inferential feeling of reacquaintance with one's past. It does so by linking content retrieved from storage with autonoetic awareness during retrieval. On this view, memory is not the content of experience, but the manner in which that content is experienced. I discuss some theoretical and practical implications and advantages of adopting this more circumscribed view of memory. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. How to cite this article: WIREs Cogn Sci 2014. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1333 INTRODUCTION In this article, I present two separate, but closelyintertwined theses. One offers an analysis of the mechanisms underlying the experience of memory, as well as the criteria we use to decide whether a mental state is an act of memory as opposed to, say, a perception, belief, dream, thought, or act of imagination. Contra current practice in much of the behavioral sciences, I argue that memory is not isomorphic with, identifiable from or reducible to analysis of the physically specifiable and quantifiable properties of content present in awareness. Rather, memory is the manner in which content is presented to awareness ∗Correspondence to: klein@psych.ucsb.edu Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA Conflict of interest: The authors have declared no conflicts of interest for this article. during an act of retrieval. Borrowing a phrase from Nagel,1 'there is something it is like' for a mental state to be experienced as an act of remembering. To determine if a mental state is a memory, one needs to consider both the content in awareness and the way that content is made available to awareness. My second thesis concerns what I see as the overly liberal criteria used by both philosophers and behavioral scientists to classify a mental state is an act of memory. Although the practice of viewing various psychological faculties (e.g., knowledge, navigation, recognition, categorization, skills) as manifestations of memory has been in evidence for more than 1000 years,2–4 this inclusive proclivity has increased dramatically in the past century (e.g., Section The Rise of Multiple Systems View of Memory and the Gradual Repositioning of the Past). Recent proliferation in types of memory stems, in large part, from a failure to differentiate between © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci the origin of an outcome and the outcome itself. All mental events have an origin. Many result from, or connect to, sensory and/or introspective experience. The underlying assumption, typically unstated, is that a mental state merits the label 'memory' if it can be shown to be causally linked to an initial act of sensory or introspective registration. However, the fact that a current mental state is the outcome of past learning does not license the conclusion that learning necessarily eventuates in memory. When an initial act of registration produces a mental state, that state may be a memory: But it also may be knowledge, skill, belief, dream, plan, imagination, decision, judgment, feeling of familiarity, act of categorization, an idea, a hope, a fear, and so on. To label this diversity of outcomes expressions of memory is to broaden the construct's domain of applicability to encompass a sizable portion of neural activity that is not strictly vegetative or homeostatic. In effect, we reduce the term 'memory' to a meaningless designator. In this paper, I take the position that the fact that events in one's past determine our success in engaging in current thought or behavior is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition to sanction the conclusion that a thought or behavior is an act of memory.a To qualify as memory, the product of learning needs to be a mental state of the 'right sort'. What makes it the 'right sort' is that it includes the feeling that one is reliving a past experience-that is, it provides a directly-given, non-inferential sense that one's current mental state reflects a happening from one's past. On this view, the range of phenomena toward which the term 'memory' currently applies is in serious need of pruning. These two threads are conceptually interwoven. However, interconnectedness should not be taken for inseparability. It is possible to endorse the idea that much of what we now label 'memory' oversteps our epistemic and ontological warrant, while rejecting some, or much, of the theoretical considerations offered in support. Conversely, one can accept some, or much, of what I have to say about the mechanisms underlying memorial experience without having to agree that the concept of memory needs to be reined in (one can, of course, reject or accept both threads in full). The point is that the two theses-i.e., that memory entails a very particular type of experience (a temporal orientation toward one's past; see Sections Subjective Temporality and The Core Thesis: What Memory Is), and that memory cannot be fully appreciated unless these experiential properties are taken fully into account-are functionally independent.b Finally, I attempt to show that the proposed selectivity regarding the use of the term 'memory' is more than semantic hair-splitting or linguistic posturing. Our language, as is well known, plays a critical role in our appreciation of reality and the questions we address to nature. A more nuanced and circumscribed delineation of the states and processes we take to be acts of memory has consequences for how we conduct and interpret our research-whether that work consists in traditional psychological empiricism or more recent radiological efforts to identify memory's neural correlates. Conceptual prudence also has the consequence of helping investigators formulate questions that better capture the ontological commitments of nature. As Heisenberg and Bohr6,7 and many others have noted, we learn from nature only what she chooses to reveal in response to the questions we ask. Asking the 'right' questions about memory is thus essential if we hope to cut nature at her ontological seams. In short, the value of calling attention to the problem of making explicit the criteria we use to justify attribution of the term 'memory' stands on its own, independent of any specific 'solution' to the question of 'what mental states qualify as acts of memory?' The ideas presented also have implications that go beyond the issue 'what memory is'. This more encompassing aspect of the paper will not be apparent at the outset, but by the time the reader arrives at the penultimate section, I hope he or she will see that my stance with regard to memory is a particular instance of a more general proposal for how the mind works. It seems worth calling attention to this meta-theoretical aspect of the paper up front (so the reader can keep a lookout for the 'big picture'), but to not detract from the specifics, explicit mention of the broader issue is deferred until Section The Big Picture: How the Mind Works. WHAT IS MEMORY? THE OFFICIAL DOCTRINE Memory is a mental-construct term. Like most such terms, we know how to apply the word (and its cognates; e.g., remembering, reminiscing, recollecting) with ease and efficiency in everyday conversation and introspective reports. However, while most people know how to talk about memory, the principles justifying its use can be stated only with great difficulty, if at all8,9). This need not worry the layperson. But for academics, it is essential that we be able to map the logical as well as phenomenological topography of the mental constructs we deal in. This is the task of philosophers and psychologists. A review of their efforts will, I believe, show that current usage of the term 'memory' often is misapplied and thus in need of emendation. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is So, how do academics define 'memory'? Most philosophers and behavioral scientists subscribe, with minor reservations, to the following principles: Memory consists in an initial act of registration (learning) which, via the continuity assumed necessary and provided by the mechanism of storage,c eventuates in an act of retrieval. In broad outline, memory can be taken as organically-based activity (I will not deal with the 'memory' of artifacts, such as computational devices) in which information made available (via perception of the external world or introspection) results in an alteration of the neural machinery (i.e., encoding). These neural signatures are laid down (typically subject to considerable and ongoing modification14–19) in various cortical substrates (i.e., storage). To qualify as an act of memory-as opposed to a disposition to remember (i.e., the idea that a memory can both precede and outlast its expression; see Section Memory Is Not Unconscious)-these alterations must be causally linked to changes in the organism's behavior (mental and/or physical) at some point in time following their acquisition (i.e., retrieval). This definition is sufficiently general to encompass most contemporary views of memory. There are, of course, issues and controversies it does not directly address (e.g., is memory unitary or multiple, conscious versus unconscious, a process or a substance, malleable or stable?). But the definition is expansive enough to allow room for discussion of these concerns. Not surprisingly-since the definition is crafted to capture the 'received view'-the majority of contemporary definitions of memory are in substantial conformity. Thus, Crowder20 defines memory as a term 'used for both the product of learning and process of retention and retrieval' (p. 4; see also Refs 21–23). That this three-stage progression (encoding, storage, retrieval) captures memory's sequential logic is evidenced by its durability: Similar formulations are found in texts dating back several centuries. Edridge-Green,24 for example, defines memory as 'the process by means of which the external world and ideas are retained for use on future occasions' (p. 1). Von Feinaigle,25 taking a similar view, sees memory as 'that faculty that enables us to treasure up, and preserve for future use, the knowledge we acquire' (p. 1). Subjective Temporality So what, if anything, might be missing from a definition of memory that (1) has been common currency in the behavioral sciences for most of their existence, and (2) has been crafted to capture the key features of the concept in the broadest of brush strokes? The answer is subtle but critically important: What is missing is an explicit statement of the relation between memory and the mode of subjective temporality it affords. Perhaps the fact that memory is about the past is so apparent that it goes without saying. Why bother to state the obvious? (Note: phrases such as 'on future occasions' [see the above definitions] are mute with respect to phenomenology; they simply reference the retentive property of memory). Everyone knows that memory has a special connection with the past. This is reflected in the fact that the overwhelming majority of memory studies explore it in its relation to the past-we measure retention, evaluate the veracity of recollection, explore the manner in which the past is represented in the brain, assess the amount of information that has been accumulated and the duration it remains accessible, etc.-with fidelity to the past serving as the essential criterion (for reviews, see Refs 26, 27, 23, and 28). But the subjective temporal orientation of the act of remembering remains unvoiced in most contemporary definitions of the construct (similar concerns are raised by Kvale29). As we will see in Section Memory as a Feeling of Pastness: An Historical Review, this was not always the case. The absence of explicit mention of subjective pastness in definitions of memory likely is an example of what Rescher30 calls a scientific precommitment- that is, a presumption that plays a critical (though largely unquestioned and typically unstated) role in determining the formative background of the questions we ask of about a construct. But does this precommitment have epistemic warrant? What underwrites the unique connection we presume to exist between memory and the past? What makes it distinctive? The most obvious answer is that memory's very existence, of logical necessity, depends on its causal connection to past occurrences.5 Unfortunately, the demonstration of a relation between an initial act of registration and a present mental state is not sufficient to legitimize the ascription of 'memory' (see Section Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge are about the Present and Future, not the Past). Many psychological states and processes, including, but not limited to, planning, judging, categorizing, deciding, believing, imagining, desiring, intending, thinking, recognizing, searching, navigating, hope, and fear are contingent on past experience. Indeed, with the exception of purely vegetative, homeostatic, and regulatory function, virtually every neural activity and the states in which it eventuates result from some form of learning (of which there are many31). © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci All consciously experienced states of the brain are 'something' that came from 'somewhere'. And, with the exception of genetically preprogrammed acts of mentation, that 'somewhere' is one's past. But coming from the past does not sanction the inference that the 'something' in awareness is about the past. And, as I hope to show in Sections Memory as a Feeling of Pastness: An Historical Review and Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge are about the Present and Future, not the Past, memory is not just from the past; it is also about the past. The fact that a mental state can be shown to be connected to the past does not license the conclusion that it is a memory any more than showing that a tree comes from a seed entails that the seed is a tree. As Allport32 observed, psychological faculties often become functionally autonomous from the conditions of their origination. The act of learning can, and does, produce a variety of mental outcomes, only some of which merit the designation 'memory'. This is a critically important point that, in the context of contemporary treatments of memory, cannot be overstressed. In more formal terms, the belief that attributing memorial status to an occurrent mental state is justified by its origin in the past is to engage in a logical fallacy. The fallacy can be stated as follows: 1. Memories are mental states that originate from past experience. 2. Experiences in my past are causally connected to my present mental state. 3. Therefore, my present mental state is a memory. Arguments taking this form can lead to a false conclusion even when statements 1 and 2 are true (which, in the present case, they are). Since memory is not the only mental state known to be born of previous experience, the fact that an occurrent state derives from past experience does not guarantee that it is a state of memory. This is not to deny that non-memorial states can, and often do, draw on the resources provided by memory (primarily in their formative stages-i.e., prior to their automatization33,34). It is to say that including under the heading 'memory' all those states whose genesis traces to information acquired in one's past stretches the concept to the point at which just about everything we think and do can be considered as an act of memory. The concept becomes so inclusive that it becomes a meaningless designator. Moyal-Sharrock35 nicely summarizes these concerns: '... events in one's past determine our current success in engaging in virtually every thought and behavior possible, but I do not find this reason enough to envisage every learned pattern of thought or behavior as involving memory. The acquisition of these patterns may have involved memory at some point (e.g., prior to their automatization or habituation), and this may be grounds enough to see them as the products of memory, but this is trivial ground... it is no more than to say that memory has played a role in the achievement of (i.e., various mental states), not that it continues to do so in the subsequent deployment of all our behavior and thought' (p. 226; parentheses added for clarification). In summary, while memory is causally connected to experiences in one's past, past experiences do not necessarily result in memory. Accordingly, the demonstration of a connection between past experience and a present psychological state is insufficient to do the work necessary to legitimize the claim that a state is a memory. It is instructive to note in this regard that, despite their commitment to a view of the mind as a tabula rasa-and thus populated by products of past experience-philosophers from Aristotle to present day treat memory as a particular manifestation of that experience (see Section Memory as a Feeling of Pastness: An Historical Review). Clearly more is at stake in classifying mental events than their connection to the past. The question is 'in what way or ways does the pastness of memory differ from the pastness of non-memorial states?' The Core Thesis: What Memory Is The position championed in this paper trades on the proposition that memory is not simply the content of an experience, but the manner in which that content is experienced (see Section The Special Case of Episodic Recollection). More specifically, memory is a special mode of experiencing-one that provides the experiencer with a phenomenological relation to his or her past that cannot be conferred by non-memorial mental states (see Section Memory: A Present Mental State Felt as Past). On this view, there are no unconscious, implicit, or dispositional memories (see Section Memory Is Not Unconscious). Nonexperiential processes contribute to memorial experience, but they are not memory (where memory is taken as the manner in which mental content given to experience: see Box 1). Nor is their presence necessarily predictive of a memorial experience (sub-experiential background conditions are a necessary but not sufficient condition for memorial experience; e.g., Sections The Part/Whole Error and Implications: The Neural Correlates of Memory). © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is BOX 1 NOTES ON SOME OF THE KEY TERMS USED IN THIS PAPER In this box, I spell out the intended meaning of several terms that play an important role in this paper. My reasons for doing so are two-fold. First, each of these terms is sufficiently central to the ensuing discussion that explicit specification of my (perhaps idiosyncratic) conceptualizations seems warranted. Second, some of these terms have more than one colloquially accepted use (e.g., experience); accordingly, a precise treatment of their usage helps establish a common referential base. While not everyone will agree with my definitions, there should be little question of the meanings I intend. 1. Mental State: X is a mental state only if and only if it there is 'something it is like'1 for the organism to have the mental state. A mental state contains both content (e.g., objects of awareness– or what is sometimes called aboutness or intentionality) and qualitative (i.e., the subjective feel of the content) aspects. It is thus the experiential outcome of a process (or set of processes) that can have nonexperiential aspects supporting its realization. While these non-experiential preconditions are necessary for realizing the mental state, they are nonmental in the sense that they are mechanisms that help make experience possible, but are not the experience per se-that is, as it is felt. They conceivably could go on without there being any experience. An analogy may help: A play consists in a great deal of behind the scenes activity, but, strictly speaking, none of this activity is the play per se (I thank Galen Strawson for calling my attention to this analogy). All mental states are experiential in the sense described next. 2. Experience: Experience is the qualitative aspect of the mental states you are having right now. Experience is what most philosophers have in mind when they talk about consciousness. In my usage, all experience is conscious experience. While some who use the term 'experience' have in mind sensation (e.g., pain) and perception (e.g., that tree over there), experience, as I use the term, can take as its intentional object such things as thought, belief, memory, and other mental content. In this way, experience can be cognitive as well as sensory. 3. Experience and Feeling: Although some philosophers hold that a feeling is an additional mental item accompanying the experienced content of a mental state (see points 1 and 2), for my purposes nothing substantive rides on this distinction. Accordingly, when I use the term 'feeling' I refer to the qualitative mode in which a mental state is apprehended. In my sense, all experience is felt-i.e., it is the particular 'what it is like-ness' of the mental state you are having right now. 4. Precondition: I occasionally will talk about nonmental preconditions (e.g., the operations of encoding storage and retrieval). These preconditions, though necessary for a mental state (e.g., memory), are not sufficient for its realization as experience (see point 1 above). They are building blocks that can, when combined in the proper way with a particular subjective context (e.g., temporally propertied), eventuate in, say, a memorial experience. The building block metaphor may help unpack my intended meaning. Encoding, storage, and retrieval (to use 'memory' as my example) can be viewed as the building blocks that, when conjoined with the proper 'instructions' (internal or external context; preexisting neural pathways, etc.) and subjective feelings of pastness, result in a memorial experience. But these preconditions are no more 'memory' than a collection of concrete blocks and a set of blueprints is a house. Under different circumstances (different contexts, different plans, and so on), they can be used to construct any number of mental and nonmental outcomes. They are thus necessary, not sufficient. Thus, while memory is dependent on the integrity of a set of causally necessary stages (encoding, storage, and retrieval), it is not their inevitable product. They are the preconditions (see Box 1) that make memory experience possible. But the same stages can give rise to a variety of experiences: Memory is the manner in which content acquired at encoding and retrieved from storage is experienced. To be a memory, content must be the subject of recollective experience (while it might appear that retrieval is being equated with memory, this would be an incorrect reading. Retrieval, per se, may produce memory. But it also may result in mental states better described as belief, thought, desire, etc. It is the conjoining of the act of retrieval with a particular mode © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci of temporal subjectivity that makes the content in awareness 'memory content'. Recollection consists in two separate but interdependent parts. First, to count as an act of recollection (i.e., memory), a mental state must be causally linked to an experience the individual formerly enjoyed. Second, memory is not simply from the past; it is a special way of being about the past (see Section Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge are about the Present and Future, not the Past). To qualify as an act of memory, the content in awareness must present itself as a reexperience of an experience previously had. This feeling of reexperiencing is directly given to consciousness, rather than as the product of an act of inference or interpretation (of course, if that inference, though lacking an immediate sense of pastness, were to subsequently evoke-in some unspecified manner-a feeling of temporal subjectivity, it then would be taken as a memory. In contrast, an inference that only led one to conclude that occurrent mental content was due to past experience would be a belief, but not an experience of recollection). Thus, a current mental state is an act of memory (i.e., recollection) if and only if both conditions (connection to the past and past-oriented subjective temporality) are in play. On this view, recognizing a tune as a Beatle's song, and knowing that you have heard it in the past, does not license the inference that you are remembering the tune. In most cases, you simply hear a song (and may know certain facts about it; e.g., its name, composers, and so on). But you do not hear it as a song previously heard. You may believe, know, or infer this to be the case; but more typically you do not consider whether your recognition derives from past experience (see Section Implications: Measures and Methods of Assessing Memory). By similar reasoning, knowing my name is Stan is not an act of memory. It is knowledge presented to consciousness without any hint of connection with past experience. I know my name is Stan, and that is that. Of course, this knowledge was previously acquired. But reexperiencing the act of acquisition plays no role in my occurrent experience. I may subsequently infer that I learned my name in the past, but this inference is not concurrent with the content on presentation to awareness (See Section So, What Is Episodic Memory? The Role of Autonoetic Awareness). Thus, in contrast to contemporary psychological and neuroscience treatments (see Sections Psychological Treatments of Memory: The Beginnings and Contemporary Psychological Views of Multiple Systems of Memory), acts of knowing are not necessarily acts of memory.d As we will see in the Section Memory as a Feeling of Pastness: An Historical Review, the proposed reconceptualization of memory as content conjoined with a specific type of temporal subjectivity (i.e., a non-inferential feeling of past as past) has a long history in Western intellectual thought, tracing back to Aristotle (384–322 BCE). In summary, the fact that a current mental state derives from past experience does not, by itself, justify labeling that state a memory. In its most general form, my reasoning is as follows: I can have an experience of X which mentions Y or enables an inference of Y without having an experience of Y. Substitute the word 'content' for X and 'pastness' for Y and my thesis is laid bare: 'Memory' is a term that is (or should be) reserved for those experiences directly felt to be a reliving of the circumstances from which they were acquired (support for this assertion will be presented in Sections Memory: A Present Mental State Felt As Past and Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge Are about the Present and Future, Not the Past). While the pastness of a mental state may be known in virtue of conceptual analysis, such analysis does not legitimize the ascription of the term. To remember is to have an immediate, non-analytic feeling that one's current mental state is coterminous with past experience. Memory, in all its manifestations, entails the experience of the past as past. MEMORY: A PRESENT MENTAL STATE FELT AS PAST So, how might this conception of memory be supported? One way is to examine the history of ideas about the nature of memory. The belief that human memory consists of mental content known in the present, but felt to be from the past, has deep roots, originating in Greek antiquity (see Section The Rise of Multiple Systems View of Memory and the Gradual Repositioning of the Past). While long-held beliefs about nature are no guarantee that they capture the natural order (the earth, after all, was believed to be the center of the universe for thousands of years36), they have considerably more epistemic warrant when their subject matter is personal phenomenology.37–40 Beliefs about experience, rather than the content of experience, take as their object undeniable, introspectively-given states whose experiential characteristics are made visible by the experience itself. As Gallagher41 notes, 'My access to myself (my self) in first-person experience is immediate and non-observational; that is, it doesn't involve a perceptual or reflective act of consciousness' (p. 15). While our interpretation of the content of experience © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is may be inaccurate (e.g., the sun travels around the earth; two parallel lines appear to be converging), we cannot be mistaken about what that content is.37 As regards the experiential character of mental states, 'how they are given is how they are' (Ref 37, p. 51). In short, the psychological topography of our mental constructs is ultimately based on first-person acquaintance with the experiential acts in which they are realized.38,42 There is simply no other way to reliably know what a mental state, qua mental state, entails.43 While experience eventually may prove grounded in events taking place at the neural, molecular, atomic, or subatomic level, reducing our phenomenology to the motion, shape, and size of its constituents (or knowledge thereof) cannot provide the information we acquire in virtue of having the experience.37,42,44 As Varela et al.43 note: 'When it is cognition or mind that is being examined, the dismissal of experience becomes untenable, even paradoxical'. They continue 'To deny the truth of our own experience in the scientific study of ourselves is not only unsatisfactory; it is to render the scientific study of ourselves without a subject matter'. (p. 13–14). With mental states, experience comes first.38,40,42 First-person acquaintance with our phenomenology thus provides the palate we use to give color, form, and texture to our psychological landscape-a depiction not capable of being fully realized from a purely theoretical rendering37,44,45). This is not to say we have first-person access to all the workings of our minds. In many (perhaps most) cases, we do not.46 But we do have a privileged relation with the experienced outcomes of the workings of our neural machinery. Unfortunately, the success of our efforts to translate our experience of mental reality into a consensually sanctioned conceptual landscape is not guaranteed by privileged access. Attempts to catalog psychological faculties have been in a state of continual transition since such things became part of the academic mission.47 What is remarkable about memory, therefore, is the stability with which our insights about this particular mental occurrence-specifically, its special relation to the past-have remained firmly entrenched (until very recently; see Sections The Rise of Multiple Systems View of Memory and the Gradual Repositioning of the Past and Psychological Treatments of Memory: The Beginnings) in both popular culture and scholarly venues (see Section Memory as a Feeling of Pastness: An Historical Review). While longevity does not assure ontological warrant, it does provide some confidence that, at least with respect to mapping our subjectivity, we might be close to cutting nature at an ontological seam. Another argument for taking seriously the position that memory entails the experience of a present mental state as reacquaintance with one's past is the usefulness of this stance. The value of a theory is determined, in part, by the extent to which it facilitates the organization of data that otherwise might be viewed as collections of unrelated phenomena.48–50 The theory I champion offers a parsimonious account for a variety of 'apparently' diverse mental phenomena, including amnesia, cognitive dissociations, future-oriented mental time travel, radiological analyses of the brain, nonhuman memory, Déjà vu, and more (some of which I discuss in Section Considerations and Implications). It also helps explain why episodic and semantic content often show significant overlap with regard to the very features-i.e., time, place, and self-widely held to be the basis by which we distinguish between the offerings of these systems (see Section Contemporary Psychological Views of Multiple Systems of Memory). Finally, the theory draws attention to neurological case material whose relevance for the study memory has, to date, been underappreciated. For example, the study of memory is enriched by the realization that a patient's suffering a felt loss of felt ownership of their mental states falls within the purview of memory (see Section Is Autonoetic Awareness Intrinsic to Memory?). Obviously, none of these considerations, by itself, constitutes a knockout argument for treating as memory only those psychological experiences that provide a special relation to the past. However, taken together, a reasonable case emerges for taking the proposal seriously. In the next section, I present a brief review of the history of intellectual thought on human memory and its felt relation to the past. Memory as a Feeling of Pastness: An Historical Review In what follows, I present a brief review of the origins of our current ideas about memory. While modern empiricism views such philosophical antecedents primarily as mild curiosities, historical/philosophical treatment of memory provides rich ground to mine with regard to (1) conceptual clarification of the construct, as well as (2) the manner in which we frame our empirical inquiries. Indeed, as we will see, the questions philosophers have raised about memory plainly are visible in contemporary psychological debates.10,11,51,52 In Western thought,e interest in the topic of memory stretches back to early Ionian and Greek philosophers. However, at this stage, discussion was mostly incidental to debates concerning 'more © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci weighty' matters, such as the nature of reality and the soul.3 The first systematic treatment of memory, per se, traces to Aristotle's De memoria.56,57 Due to well-known ambiguities surrounding the importation of terminology from different cultural and historic contexts,4 caution must be exercised when attempting to make sense of familiar terms such as remembering, recollection, and reminiscing as used in different times and places. While a critical analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, for Aristotle, a primary feature of memory is the recollective act (in Aristotle's terms, memory is what we now call storage, while recollection maps to retrieval56), which always makes reference to the past. In contrast, sensations and perception refer to the present. In modern parlance, memory thus is realized by an act of recollection in which one experiences a current object of awareness as something from one's past. Whether Aristotle construed acquaintance with the past as (1) an intrinsic property of the object in awareness, or (2) additional information annexed to the object at retrieval, is not entirely clear (Refs 56 and 58; see also Section Summing Up). What is clear, however, is that for Aristotle, memory is about the past (as perception is about the present, and hope and opinion are about the future3,57). The influence of Aristotelian ideas on subsequent generations of Western thought about memory can be hardly overestimated.3,4 While postAristotelian discourse was not always concerned with theoretical explication (many were interested in mnemotechnics-i.e., the art of memory; e.g., Cicero, Pliny, Simonides, Albertus, Camillo, and Romberch-and/or memory in relation to the soul-Plotinus, Augustine, Aquinas; for reviews, see Refs 3,59, and 60), most treatments were guided by the principles found in De memoria.3,4,60 Following a long lapse of interest in theoretical aspects of memory (as opposed to its application)-and coinciding with the initial stirrings of the scientific revolution-a resurgence of interest in the 'theories of memory' began in the 17th century. For example, Locke61 famously stated that memory is the power of the mind 'to revive Perceptions, which it once had, with this additional perception annexed to them, that it has had them before' (p. 150; my emphasis). While Locke is somewhat vague about the manner in which this perception of pastness is given in awareness, his other writings are consistent with the idea that it is in the form of a direct, non-inferential feeling. For instance, Locke claims that 'memory presents itself as an experience one has previously enjoyed...not merely thought or judged to be an experience previously enjoyed' (cited in Ref 62, p. 324; emphasis mine). That is, an act of conceptual reconstruction is not sufficient to identify the content present in awareness as an act of memory; rather the past tense of an occurrent state is a direct, non-inferential feeling given to awareness. Hume63 also rejected the idea that a conceptual demonstration of a connection with the past is sufficient for remembering (given Hume's well-known skepticism about causality, this hardly is surprising). For Hume, what makes the content of a mental state an offering from memory trades on phenomenologically-given aspects of occurrent experience (e.g., the liveliness or vivacity with which the content is apprehended), rather than on a conceptual analysis of its causal history. As Flage64 puts it, these phenomenological indices provide 'guidance for distinguishing the ideas of memory from beliefs regarding temporally located objects that are not based on memory'. (p. 170). Whether these indices (a) are heuristics that enable an inference of pastness, or (b) directly produce feelings of pastness, is not explicit in Hume's analysis. However, other remarks made about memory -e.g., '...what is memory but a faculty by which we raise up images of past perception?' (Ref 63, p. 260)-suggest that he may have leaned toward the latter interpretation. Nonetheless, the jury remains in recess regarding whether for Hume, phenomenology, without interpretation, is sufficient to provide the experience of pastness. Reid65 similarly ascribed to the view that memory directs awareness toward events to which one previously bore witness: 'Memory can only produce a continuance or renewal of a former acquaintance with the things remembered'. (p. 255; emphasis added). For Reid, memory is not simply a current apprehension of a past event, but rather an act of mind that enables a non-inferential reexperiencing of the past as past. Reason and testimony play no part in this process.66 In Reid's terms, semantic memory (had the construct existed) would not count as memory. Rather, it would be seen as knowledge or belief (the two are not the same-for both epistemic and psychological reasons67). A person who reports that 'Sacramento is the Capital of California', or states that 'John is tall', is expressing a belief or knowledge, not memory (note: In this paper, I use the word 'knowledge' in its colloquial sense, not its technical meaning as true, justified belief68). This is because the information present in awareness is unlikely to preserve a past apprehension65-i.e., that X (e.g., 'John is tall') is known in virtue of a feeling of reacquaintance with something that happened to me in my past (i.e., I saw tall John). © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is As we will see in Section The Declarative System: Semantic and Episodic, even temporally propertied reports such as 'I remember that I saw Jimi Hendrix in concert in 1968' are not necessarily memory claims. While I can infer the pastness of this assertion on the basis of temporal information embedded in its content (i.e., that the concert took place in 1968), my occurrent experience does not necessarily entail a direct, non-inferential feeling that I am reexperiencing the concert. What I experience may be belief or knowledge. Our culturally sanctioned use of the word 'remember' to express our current phenomenology is thus an ambiguous guide to the memorial status of the state underlying the report of an experience: In many cases, nothing is lost (and, I would argue, something is gained) if the word 'remember' is replaced by such words as 'know' or 'believe' (see also Section The Declarative System: Semantic and Episodic). Recent philosophical offerings continue to echo the idea that memory is about the past and that this aboutness is a direct, pre-reflective constituent of the memory experience. A case in point is Russell's theory of memory.69 Russell is adamant that the mental content (which he refers to as the image) cannot, by itself, make a mental state a state of remembering. Rather, the essence of memory is the feeling that the content in awareness is a reacquaintance with one's past. According to Russell, memory entails both (1) a direct acquaintance with the object in awareness and (2) a feeling (conferred by the act of acquaintance) that one now is conscious of something one was conscious of in the past (i.e., the object present to awareness). In Russell's terms (like those of Locke, Hume, and Reid), phenomenology plays the essential role in making a mental event an act of memory; a feeling of reacquaintance with the past takes priority over conceptual knowledge of the past.70 Husserl71 also sees memory as an act of experiencing one's past as past. That is, a past object or event is remembered as having been perceived; but not just anywhere, at any time, or by anyone. The object of memory is experienced in a manner that both reflects and reveals the way in which it originally entered the remembering agent's life. It consists in apprehending the object in awareness as a representation of an earlier perception. Expressed in Husserl's terms, memory recaptures an elapsed portion of one's stream of consciousness. In this sense, he sees memory as a doubling of consciousness-i.e., the present act of consciousness apprehends the original act of conscious registration.71–74 William James75 skillfully captures the essence of views presented in this section: 'A farther condition is required before the present image can be held to stand for a past original. That condition is the fact that the imagined be expressly referred to the past, thought as in the past...But even that would not be memory. Memory requires more than mere dating of a fact in the past. It must be dated in my past. In other words, I must think that I directly experienced its occurrence. It must have... 'warmth and intimacy'... ' (Ref 75, p. 650; emphasis in original). In summary, although philosophical conceptions of memory spanning more than two millennia vary on a number of specifics, there is important common ground. A core thesis, found in virtually every treatment presented, is that what makes a mental state a memory (as opposed to, say, a thought, belief, or imagination) is that it is about one's past. Moreover, this 'past aboutness' is a directly-given feeling of reacquaintance, rather than a result of inference, interpretation, or other conceptual analyses. I have devoted a considerable amount of text to discussion of the long-held view that memory is acquaintance with one's past as past. My reasons for doing so hopefully will become clear by Section The Special Case of Episodic Recollection, where I present evidence (both conceptual and empirical) that this form of temporality is what differentiates memorial from non-memorial experience. The Rise of Multiple Systems View of Memory and the Gradual Repositioning of the Past A typically unvoiced assumption in the treatments thus far discussed is that memory is a unitary faculty. However, a dramatic change, tracing to de Biran's classic analysis of the faculties of thought, was about to take place.f In his book The Influence of Habit on the Faculty of Thinking,76 de Biran proposed that memory is a multiplicity consisting in three distinct types-representational, sensitive, and mechanical. Although de Biran's ideas did not have an immediate effect on theorizing, the theme of memory as multiplicity was given a renewed presence by Bergson in 1908. In Matter and Memory,77 he distinguishes between memory as a mental state and memory as manifested in performance of habitual acts. In the years following, philosophical analyses further extended the theme of 'memory as multiplicity' to include just about anything one might know or do in virtue of an originating experience (e.g., factual memory, sensory memory, lexical memory, procedural memory, semantic memory, perceptual memory, personal memory, autobiographical memory, and so forth78–81). © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci A three-part scheme gradually developed in which a mental construct qualified as an act of memory provided it entailed, or made possible, (1) a feeling of direct acquaintance with one's past-i.e., episodic memory, (2) the realization (by purely conceptual analysis) that content present in awareness derived from one's past-i.e., semantic memory, or (3) performance of skills and habits learned in one's past-i.e., procedural memory.79,80,82 Of the three, only the episodic component maintained direct experience of pastness as a necessary constituent. For semantic and procedural forms of memory, explicit reference to the past was neither a necessary accompaniment of nor a requirement for their successful achievement. During the past 100 years, it has become increasingly acceptable to view as memory forms of learning whose expression in thought and action does not necessarily entail awareness of, or reference to, the past (e.g., habits, skills, knowledge, unconscious memories). Provided the images, propositions, or objects in awareness can be demonstrated (via some conceptual operation) to be causally linked to events in one's past, they can qualify as objects of memory. Thus, the modus spectandi-i.e., the manner in which something is given to awareness-no longer was a necessary constituent of memory. All that mattered was that a person having a memory be able to demonstrate (if required or desired) that a causal connection existed between the act of registration and its subsequent representation or implementation in thought or behavior.5 In short, while being about the past remained an essential criterion for memory, this aboutness could take the form of an unstated (but theoretically demonstrable) presupposition (although it is telling that most philosophical treatments remained sharply focused on the question of the manner in which memory enables a person to reexperience the past78,79,82–89). PSYCHOLOGICAL TREATMENTS OF MEMORY: THE BEGINNINGS The fact that we can formulate internally consistent, logically coherent mental taxonomies does not guarantee our way of partitioning the psychological landscape honors the ontological commitments of nature (I am assuming here that experience occurs in, and thus is part of, the natural world42). For this, we can benefit from insights afforded by empirical investigation. Thus far, I have concentrated on philosophical treatments of memory. This largely is a consequence of historical precedence: Prior to the mid-1800s, there were no treatments from a purely psychological perspective for the simple reason that psychology, as an academic discipline, had yet to take root. Memory- both in its clinical90 and non-pathological91 manifestations-did not become the object of empirical inquiry until the latter half of the 19th century. The emergence of a 'psychology of memory' was contemporaneous with philosophy's transition away from memory as a unitary faculty toward memory as a collection of conceptually distinct capacities united by their origination in acts of experience. Not surprisingly, psychological thought was influenced by this more liberal conception. While the idea that memory is 'about the past' still held sway,92 for many new species of memory (e.g., acts of knowing, performance of learned behaviors) pastness was based on conceptual analysis rather than the experience of reliving. Academic psychology's commitment to the position that memory consists in multiple types, not all of which require direct acquaintance with the past as past, received a significant boost from an unexpected source-the publication of a paper detailing the case of patient H.M. As a result of a surgical resection of his medial temporal lobes, H.M. was rendered profoundly amnesic for events experienced following his procedure.93 Although not apparent at the time, H.M.'s memory issues would have a transformative effect on academic psychology's conception of memory. H.M.'s memory presented a puzzle. Despite professing a lack of recollection for any events encountered postsurgically, he nonetheless was able to learn some new things (albeit at a slower pace and with more limited scope than found for neurally intact individuals34,94–97). This contrast between H.M.'s profound anterograde amnesia and his spared learning ability presented a dilemma-how could H.M. perform newly acquired behaviors if he was unable to remember anything about them? An answer began to take shape by the early 1970s.g Influenced by the conceptual resources made available by the then current philosophical treatment of memory, the dissociation between H.M.'s fully dysfunctional anterograde memory and partially intact learning could be accommodated by the idea that memory exists in a variety of types, only some of which were impacted by his surgical procedure. In short order, all sorts of dissociations between memory and learned performance were being explained in terms of selective impairment of systems of and subsystems within memory (e.g., systems devoted to knowledge about self, others, body parts, animate objects, inanimate objects, numbers, countries, words, and so on; for reviews see Refs 96 and 99–107). © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is A second line of support for the multiple systems view came from analyses of nonclinical phenomena. One of the earliesth and the most influential treatments was Tulving's109 classic distinction between the episodic and semantic components of long-term memory (he later added a procedural component110).i Tulving was motivated, in large part, to effect a rapprochement between recent work112 that, despite sharing a family relation with traditional memory research (which drew on remnants of behaviorism's verbal learning tradition; e.g., remembering lists of words and paired associates), relied on quite different methods (e.g., priming), measures (e.g., response latency), and constructs (e.g., taxonomic knowledge). To this end, he proposed a unification based on the idea that long-term memory consists in two independent, yet normally interacting types or, as they came to be known, systems-episodic and semantic.106,109 Contemporary Psychological Views of Multiple Systems of Memory Most (though not all; for discussion see Refs 51 and 113) psychologists and neuroscientists now take it as axiomatic that long-term memory consists in the encoding, storage, and retrieval of two basic types of information-procedural (known also as nondeclarative105,114) and declarative.34,105,106,110,113,115,116 Nondeclarative memory makes possible the acquisition and retention of motor, perceptual, and cognitive skills (e.g., knowing how to ride a bike; knowing how to read a line of text). Its use consists in the performance of previously acquired behavioral skills and cognitive procedures.34,110,114 Declarative memory, in contrast, consists in knowing things about the world and oneself (e.g., knowing that canaries are yellow; knowing that I ate lunch with my wife on Saturday). Conceptually, the difference between procedural and declarative memory accords with Ryle's117 classic distinction between 'knowing how' (operating on the environment in ways difficult to verbalize) and 'knowing that' (stating knowledge in the form of propositions). Tulving106,109,110,118 further distinguished between two systems within declarative memory- episodic and semantic (see also Refs 34, 101, and 119). Semantic memory is generic knowledge about the world, such as Apples are edible; 2+2=4; Sacramento is the capital of California. The offerings of semantic memory are 'context-free' in the sense that they are present in awareness as occurrent knowledge without regard to where, when, or from whom that knowledge was acquired, although such information can be obtained from conceptual investigation.106,109,118–122 Episodic memory, in contrast, records events as having been experienced at a particular point in time and space. That is, it provides a record of the temporal (when) and spatial (where) context in which the original learning transpired. In addition, every episodic memory entails a sense of the self (else the content of a mental state could not be taken as part of one's past) as the agent or recipient of some action, or as the stimulus or experiencer of some state.106,109,120,121,123,124 When retrieved, episodic memories are experienced as having happened to the remembering individual in his or her past (a process Tulving calls autonoesis; see Section So, What is Episodic Memory? The Role of Autonoetic Awareness). Examples of episodic memory are mentally reliving the experience of a concert I attended last weekend and recollecting my meeting with Mike yesterday before class. Contemporary Psychological Views on the Temporal Orientation of Memory With regard to temporal orientation, a subtle but important change had taken place in the way psychologists viewed memory. Memory was still held to be a current psychological state connected to events experienced in one's past. However, a consequence of the multiple system view was that memory's relation to the past now was, more often than not, one of causal inference (i.e., semantic and procedural) rather than phenomenological acquaintance (i.e., episodic). Thus, although both colloquial usage and scientific practice continued to subscribe to the view that memory, in all its manifestations, is oriented toward the past (see Section Subjective Temporality and Ref 92), this 'past aboutness' no longer need be based on a feeling of direct acquaintance; it could be the outcome of a rational analysis. Indeed, in cases of procedural and semantic memory, pastness typically was an unstated (and unexamined; Refs 92 and 125) presupposition, whose warrant could be demonstrated if evidence was requested or otherwise deemed appropriate. As I argue in the next section, the belief that memory, in all of its instantiations, necessarily is about the past recently has been called into question by consideration of memory's functional commitments.92,126–128 From a functional perspective, semantic and procedural memories possess not only a causal connection to one's past but also, like their episodic relative, a subjective temporal orientation.92 However-and this is the critical point-unlike episodic memory, their subjectivity © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci is oriented toward the 'now and the next'j rather than toward the past.71,92,126,128,134,135 This change in temporal orientation-conferred by adaptive function (see Section Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge are about the Present and Future, not the Past)-poses a serious problem for multiple memory theory because it means that procedural and semantic memories fail to satisfy a key criterion of what it means for a mental state to be a memory-i.e., that it is subjectively oriented toward the past. PROCEDURAL SKILLS AND SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE ARE ABOUT THE PRESENT AND FUTURE, NOT THE PAST From an evolutionary perspective, the adaptive function of information storage is intrinsically prospective: 'It is used to support future decisions and judgments, which cannot be known in advance with certainty' (Ref 115, p. 313; emphasis added). For an organism to behave more appropriately (i.e., more adaptively) at a later time because of experiences at an earlier time, the organism must be equipped with mechanisms designed by evolution to interface with systems for anticipation, planning, and behaving.115,126,134,136–140 On this view, most cognitive function has been designed by natural selection to help the organism anticipate contingencies and decide actions to take.92,115,127,128,134,141,142 These functions, in turn, both require and afford an orientation toward the 'now and the next':92,126,128,133 Life, as we experience it, comes from the future, not from the past, and it is in that direction that our attention and effort are directed. All mental states, whether externally generated or introspectively given, take place in the present. But this does not mean that all occurrent experience is confined to the temporal stasis of an eternal 'now' (for a recent treatment of differences between objective formalism of the puncate present and subjective experience of the specious present, see Ref 143). As noted in Section Memory: A Present Mental State Felt as Past, immediate experience often is accompanied by a felt temporal orientation;92 and, for reasons just discussed, that subjective temporality typically is toward the future.92,126,128,136,137,144 Accordingly-with the sole exception of episodic recollection (note: the word 'recollection' is critical here)-many, myself included, have proposed that episodic memory has a future as well as a past function/orientation. While this may be the case-though I no longer think so [Section Implications: The Role of Memory in Future-Oriented Mental Time Travel (FMTT)]-this is not its recollective aspect: the systems we call 'memory' (i.e., semantic and procedural) exist to help us face life as it comes, rather than to look back as it recedes. But if this is the case, then only episodic recollection, with its subjective orientation toward the past, can legitimately claim to be a type of memory: The subjective temporal commitments of semantic and procedural 'memories' point in the wrong direction. How can systems oriented toward the 'now and the next' be seen as types of memory? As noted in Section Subjective Temporality, the temporal aboutness of a psychological state or process is determined in reference to its experienced temporal orientation, not its de facto causal history: It is what the content in awareness is temporally about, not where it is from.92 While it certainly is the case that semantic and procedural 'memories' are causally connected to past experience, this is trivial grounds for ascribing pastness to their actualization in thought and behavior. Very few mental states are not causally tied to past experience. To assign them all on this basis to the category 'memory' is to stretch the term to its breaking point (a similar point, directed at the idea of implicit memory, is voiced by Roediger52). And to relax the criteria for memory to include an orientation toward the present and future, as well as the past, is to open the door to an inclusive chaos that has the effect of changing our investigation of 'what memory is?' to an enquiry into 'what isn't memory?' In the next section, I discuss more fully the legitimacy of ascribing the term 'memory' to procedural (non-declarative) systems of learning. In Section The Declarative System: Semantic and Episodic, the question is put to the declarative systems (semantic and episodic). The Non-declarative System: Procedural Learning Procedural learning, by definition (see Section Contemporary Psychological Views of Multiple Systems of Memory), enables the utilization of previously acquired skills (both cognitive and physical). The exercise of those skills is, by functional necessity, directed toward the 'now and the next': 'To behave' is to orient toward and prepare for impending contingencies, to perform sequential acts, and so on. On this view, procedural learning is about the present and future, not the past.92 The temporal orientation of the procedural system is not seriously in question. What is in question is whether learned skills and habits are acts of memory. In light of the arguments presented in Sections © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is Memory: A Present Mental State Felt As Past and Contemporary Psychological Views on the Temporal Orientation of Memory-i.e., that memory is subjectively oriented toward the past-a strong case can be made that procedural learning is not memory. Activation and utilization of skills and habits entail no direct reference to the act of acquisition, and their subjective orientation is toward the 'now and the next'. If memory is defined as an experience of a particular type-i.e., a feeling of acquaintance with the past-skills and habits seem poorly positioned to be category members. In the next section, I extend this temporal analysis to the types of 'memory' assumed to comprise the declarative system. Even within this (ostensibly) more memory-like domain,145 I argue that among the systems we normally accept as memory, only the episodic component has a legitimate claim to the designation. The Declarative System: Semantic and Episodic As discussed in Section Contemporary Psychological Views of Multiple Systems of Memory , semantic memory makes information available to awareness. Sometimes that information is self-generated (e.g., 'What was the name of the best picture of the year from 1934? Oh yah, \"It Happened One Night\"; \"I know that Emily is a registered Democrat. Therefore... '); other times, knowledge is cued externally by current contingencies (e.g., requests to share what one knows about XYZ) or the interpretive aspect of perception (e.g., 'That noise I hear must be a leaf blower'). In all cases, the information retrieved is in the service of current circumstances in instantaneous transition to, and continuation in, the future (even the act of retrieving words during conversation is in the service of taking part in an ongoing social event). One remembers a fact or identifies a sensation because these occurrent states enable one to participate in forward-moving circumstances.92 Indeed, the case can be made (see Section Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge are about the Present and Future, not the Past) that semantic memory is inherently present tense with a clear future-oriented leaning, even if that temporal orientation is not always focal in awareness. For example, the stories we tell (which are constructed largely from semantic knowledge146–150) constantly are being reshaped to fit demands of current experience and future goals. Past events may help to determine narrative content, but the narrative itself is contextualized by and tailored to current and impending circumstances.151–153 Although the content made available by semantic memory can refer to the past (e.g., 'I remember where I parked my car earlier today-although I don't recollect the act of parking'), these temporal references are culled from the content of the information made available to awareness (for fuller discussion see Refs 92 and 141). If justification of that temporal knowledge is either requested or felt necessary, we may draw on the resources of episodic memory to support our assertion. But in the absence of a need or request for validation, my 'knowing' (for example, where I parked my car) is experienced as knowledge simpliciter-it is occurrent in presentation (i.e., 'I know that I parked in lot #6, and I know this now'), makes no reference to its causal history (i.e., 'I know without knowing how I know'), and is temporally oriented to the 'now and next' (i.e., 'I can use my current knowledge to locate my car'). In contrast, when I have a memory of where I parked my car, I reexperience (often quasiperceptually) the act of parking. Though this information also is occurrent in presentation (i.e., 'I parked in lot #6, and I know this now') and can be used to guide future action (i.e., this recollection can help me find my car), it differs from acts such as knowing, thinking, believing, assuming, or imagining in an important way-it is subjectively oriented toward the past, providing me with a direct, non-inferential experience of the origination of my current knowledge in an act I performed earlier (i.e., 'I know where my car is parked because I recollect the act of parking'). In short, semantically-given knowledge that 'X is Y' simply is a fact present in awareness.65,92,110,144 Its temporal history plays no direct role in the experience of knowing. If any temporal awareness attaches to retrieval, it is experienced as an orientation toward the 'now and the next' (e.g., what I now need to do to find my car), not the past. On these grounds, applying the designation of 'memory' to forms of knowing (of which there are many-thinking, believing, imaging, realizing, etc.35,154) is highly questionable. To make this point in a different way, consider a declaration from 'semantic memory'– e.g., 'I remember Jan won the race' (for instance, you experience this information-without any feeling of having personally witnessed the event -in anticipation of meeting him or in response to a question about him). Now replace the word 'remember' with the word 'know'. There is, I maintain, no epistemically important change in the meaning of the proposition: When I say 'I remember', taken as a report from semantic memory, I am saying no more or less than that 'I now know' it to be the case that X (Jan) is Y (the winner of the race). I am not saying I experience this information © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci as part of my personal past (I may know or infer that it is or must be, but it is not experienced as a personal reliving. This follows from the definition of experiential quality of semantic memory; see Section Memory Is the Manner in which Content Is Given to Awareness, Not the Content per se). I can also substitute for 'remember' words such as or 'believe' or 'think' or 'form an image'. While the certitude of my assertion (e.g., claims of knowledge being more credible than claims of belief68) and its mode of apprehension (e.g., propositional versus imagistic) may be taken to vary by substitution, I am communicating no more or less than that I am now aware (with some degree of certainty) that 'X is Y', and that I know (or believe, think, or picture) 'X is Y' to be the case. The word 'remember' is simply a verbal descriptor for an occurrent mental content (which could just as easily be replaced by 'know', where to 'know' clearly must have a causal history). It sanctions no conclusions about the manner in which that content is presented to awareness, save that it is not experienced as a personal reliving of the event). By contrast, the same content, taken as a declaration from episodic memory does not submit to such alteration without a dramatic change in meaning. For example, to say that 'I know X is Y' is not the same as 'I remember X is Y' when the word 'remember' is meant to convey a sense of pastness: Knowing now 'X is Y' is experientially quite different from reliving the experience in which I learned that that 'X is Y'. Thus, the replacement of 'remember' by 'know' or 'believe' or 'think' or 'can picture' dramatically alters the meaning of assertions (beyond simply considerations of certitude; though they are mute with regard to modality of experienced presentation) when those assertions issue from episodic memory. The Part/Whole Error Ascribing the term 'memory' to a mental state or process that satisfies some, but not all, of the conditions required for its realization-for example, a process that embodies the principles of encoding, storage, and retrieval, but fails to provide the type of temporal experience required by an act of memory retrieval-is an example of a 'part/whole confusion'. A part/whole error occurs when one ascribes to a part or parts of a whole a designation that meaningfully can be ascribed only to the whole.155 With regard to procedural memory, this is reflected in the readiness with which memory theorists are prepared to label as 'memory' learned skills or behaviors, regardless of whether their enactment is accompanied by an experience of reliving the conditions surrounding their acquisition. Preconditions for the experience of memory (encoding, storage, and retrieval) belong to a host of mental states and processes. To assign the term 'memory' to occurrences that eventuate from such processes, but lack the requisite temporal phenomenology, is to designate as an act of memory mental or behavioral occurrences that share only a subset of the properties required. This, as we have seen (e.g., Section Subjective Temporality) has the consequence of welcoming as 'memory' almost any neurally-based behavior that is not strictly vegetative or regulatory. In light of such concerns, some theorists have questioned whether the performance of learned skills is an act of memory. If you get up from your chair to leave the room, do you have to remember how? When you race across a tennis court to return a serve, do you have to remember how to do so? 'Using the word \"remember\" seems strange in these contexts.' (Ref 145, p. 39; see also Refs 12 and 156). The same challenge faces the application of 'memory' to semantic systems of knowledge. Moyal-Sharrock35 captures the essence of the problem with clarity and concision: '... to put under the banner of memory the mere use of knowledge acquired in the past, is to, as it were, underemploy the concept of memory; to employ it merely because the knowledge in question was acquired in the past' (p. 221–222). While the acquisition of knowledge may have involved memory at some point (e.g., during the initial stages of learning), this is not sufficient grounds for asserting that the process of making that information available to awareness constitutes an act of memory. For that, the information must be directly given to awareness as something learned in one's past; and, as we have seen (e.g., Section Subjective Temporality), that is not the case with semantic knowledge (The same is true of procedural learning. Early in its learning history, utilization of skills is often accompanied by memory. But as acts become increasingly automatic, recollective accompaniment fades from one's phenomenology33). In short, the term 'memory' applies only to the totality of its constituent parts standing in a proper relation to one another. Attributing the term to cognitive phenomena satisfying a subset of these requirements makes no sense. To be 'memory', a mental occurrence must include all the necessary ingredients (i.e., encoding, storage, retrieval, and subjective temporality). To do otherwise is to invite conceptual confusion and taxonomic bloating. Memory as a Natural Kind A different, but related, challenge to the legitimacy of attributing memorial status to procedural and semantic systems concerns whether they constitute © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is what philosophers term a 'natural kind' (i.e., objects or groupings that reflect real distinctions in nature157,158). On analysis, things do not appear promising. Even a cursory examination of the behaviors grouped under the term 'procedural memory' reveals a diverse collection of acts that often (1) obey different rules and (2) manifest in radically different ways (e.g., reading versus throwing a baseball12,52,105,114,145,156,159–163). Similar concerns can be, and have been, raised about semantic memory.35,154,164 The variety of psychological entities that fall under the heading 'semantic memory' is extensive (e.g., propositions, facts, abstractions, schemata, images, rules, language, etc.). Moreover, its constituent members lack the phenomenological and computational coherence necessary for semantic memory to be taken as a meaningful grouping, as opposed to an ad hoc partitioning of psychological reality.165,166 As Piccinini and Scott demonstrate, very different types of mental representations and processes must be invoked to account for the diversity of phenomena falling into the category of semantic concepts. In fact, the only thing that appears to unite this wide assortment of conceptually and phenomenologically dissimilar states (other than their basis in neural activity) is the fact that they share a point of origin in past experience. But, as we have seen, this is shaky grounds for attributing natural kind status. Summing Up The arguments presented in Sections The Nondeclarative System: Procedural Learning through Memory as a Natural Kind suggest that our current classification of semantic and procedural systems as types of memory lacks conceptual as well as phenomenological warrant. These systems consist in faculties, traits and behaviors that (1) do not have the 'right sort' of temporal orientation, (2) contain only a subset of the component parts required of memory, and (3) exhibit a degree of computational and phenomenological diversity that suggests that their classification as systems of memory is based more on organizational and empirical convenience than on attempts to capture meaningful distinctions in nature. Indeed, the primary argument in support of attributing 'memory' to these systems is the causal connectivity principle.5 But, as shown repeatedly (e.g., Section The Core Thesis: What Memory Is), reliance on this criterion has the unfortunate consequence of opening the 'doors of memory' to most of the mental states and cognitive processes one can envision. In light of these considerations, it would appear that most behaviors currently categorized as acts of memory have acquired that classification in virtue of either (1) the causal connectivity principle or (2) their association with tasks whose relation to memory is stipulated rather than explicated (see Sections Implications: Analysis of Content in Awareness Is Not Informative about the Mental Act in which It Occurs and Implications: Measures and Methods of Assessing Memory). The first is a victim of the part/whole fallacy, while the second simply begs the question. THE SPECIAL CASE OF EPISODIC RECOLLECTION Based on considerations of subjective temporality (orientation toward the past; Section The Declarative System: Semantic and Episodic), componential completeness (the part–whole question; Section The Part/Whole Error), and taxonomic coherence (i.e., natural kinds; Section Memory as a Natural Kind), the label 'memory' seems best suited to episodic memory within the declarative system. My reasons are as follows. First, in contrast to other mental states classified as memory, only episodic recollection provides the proper temporal orientation. Second, only episodic recollection satisfies the componential requirements of the whole, thereby avoiding part/whole error. Third, episodic memory consists in a homogeneous collection of mental occurrences. While episodic memory requires the contributions of systems whose workings entail different cognitive processes with different computational commitments,167,168 these constituents are common to all acts of recollection. Unlike procedural and semantic 'memories', there are no known subdivisions within, or types of, episodic memory: Any observed diversity derives primarily (though not exclusively-i.e., imagistic versus propositional) from the nature of the stimuli experienced, rather than the manner in which they are processed or presented to awareness. Episodic memory thus remains a viable candidate for 'natural kind' status.169 Ironically, contemporary psychological and philosophical treatments of the works of Aristotle, Locke, Russell, and others often are quick to point out that what these thinkers 'really' meant by 'memory' is what we now know to be the episodic component of a multifaceted system.62,66,170–173 Similar correctives are voiced by memory researchers concerning conventional use of the term. The arguments presented in this paper, however, suggest that thinkers like Locke and Russell got things exactly right. It is our current criteria-not theirs-that are in need of emendation. © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci As noted in Section Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge Are about the Present and Future, Not the Past, episodic memory appears to be the lone exception to the rule that the fruits of learning are directed by functional necessity toward the present and future.92,126–128,133 While some functional commitments of the episodic system also appear future-oriented (e.g., prospection, scenario building, self-projection, and other forms of future-oriented mental time travel; note: A critical discussion of the role of episodic memory in future-oriented mental time travel is presented in Section Implications: The Role of Memory in Future-Oriented Mental Time Travel (FMTT)),k it is its recollective function that makes it uniquely deserving of the designation 'memory'. In the next section, I take a more detailed look at the mechanisms underlying episodic recollection. So, What Is Episodic Memory? The Role of Autonoetic Awareness As initially conceptualized (see Section Contemporary Psychological Views of Multiple Systems of Memory), episodic memory was held to be a system within declarative memory whose content provided its owner with a record of the temporal, spatial, and self-referential context in which the original learning transpired.106,109 By contrast, the experience of semantic knowledge lacked this trio of indices: Its offerings were experienced as content devoid of contextual elements present during its acquisition. However, as I argue in the next section, the diagnostic value of these indices is called into question by evidence from the clinical domain. The position I take in this paper is that a more promising distinction between these systems involves their subjective relation to the past. Episodic memory makes available mental content experienced as a reacquaintance with happenings that transpired previously in one's life. By contrast, content provided by semantic retrieval is experientially oriented toward the 'now and the next'. Although one logically can infer that this content was acquired at some time in one's past, recollection of its acquisition is not part of its experienced presentation (see Section Contemporary Psychological Views on the Temporal Orientation of Memory). These differences in subjective temporality were fully appreciated by Tulving, who by the mid-1980s had adopted them as the preferred basis for distinguishing between acts of episodic and semantic memory.110 Tulving argued that episodic retrieval makes available autonoetic awareness while semantic retrieval provides a type of awareness he called noetic.110,118,122,128,144,180 Autonoesis is the '...unique awareness of reexperiencing here and now something that happened before, at another time and in another place' (Ref 118, p. 68). By contrast, individuals are noetically aware when '... they retrieve general information in the absence of a feeling of reexperiencing the past' (Ref 177, p. 144). Central to the proposed distinction: 'Only 'autonoetic consciousness' is thought to bear a personally meaningful relation to time' (Ref 180, p. 4).l Drawing on the arguments presented in Sections The Core Thesis: What Memory Is, Memory: A Present Mental State Felt As Past, Procedural Skills and Semantic Knowledge are about the Present and Future, not the Past, The Nondeclarative System: Procedural Learning, and The Declarative System: Semantic and Episodic, it is reasonable to conclude that only cognitive systems associated with autonoetic awareness are capable of providing the temporal resources necessary for experiencing retrieved content as an act of memory. Episodic retrieval-which is accompanied by temporally-rich, past-oriented autonoetic experience-thus stands alone among presumptive systems of memory in satisfying all the requirements deemed individually necessary and jointly sufficient to identify a current mental state as an act of memory.m Memory Is the Manner in Which Content Is Given to Awareness, Not the Content Per Se One helpful way to bring the constituents of a system into view is to examine them when the system to which they belong is in the process of breakdown. A system's component parts, normally masked by the effortless manner in which they work together to affect a common end, are increasingly on display as the whole of which they are part comes undone.187,188 Accordingly, in much of what follows, I draw heavily on evidence from individuals suffering varying degrees of memory impairment. Tulving's reformulation of episodic and semantic experiences in terms of temporal subjectivity has been shown to be a rewarding way of generating testable hypotheses about memory.119,121,122,179,189–193 A distinction based on the type of subjective temporality associated with memory avoids a number of messy findings that, over the years, steadily have chipped away at the utility of the traditional diagnostic criteria of systems within declarative memory-i.e., the presence or absence of the content referencing whom, where, and when. For example, countervailing findings have shown that despite the still widely-held assumption that only episodic memory makes available self-referential content, semantic knowledge can also © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is reference the self (for reviews, see Refs 42, 172, 178, and 194–199). In addition, there is no principled reason why semantic knowledge cannot contain information about 'when' and 'where' (e.g., 'I know that John Lennon was born on October 9, 1940 in Liverpool, UK, although I did not experience the event of his birth or reexperience the event in which that knowledge was acquired'). In fact, there is abundant evidence to the contrary.120,123,124,195–198 Thus, the core constituents of episodic memory as initially proposed (i.e., temporal, spatial, and self-referential) can also be on display in reports of semantic experience. Indeed, there is no logical or empirical basis for asserting that the content of these two systems should differ (see Section Implications: The Neural Correlates of Memory for a discussion of the neuroanatomical basis for this similarity). This is demonstrated in a number of case studies in which patients, having lost access to episodic memory, can be retaught the temporal, spatial, and self-referential details of their life-narrative – albeit details lacking autonoetic accompaniment. One of the clearest cases is that of patient J.V., who, as a result of neural pathology, suffered profound retrograde episodic amnesia.200 Although his disease appears to have compromised both premorbid content and autonoetic awareness, he was able to relearn specific temporal and spatial details of his personal past-although he experienced this content as factual knowledge, rather than as a personal reliving. Patient A.Z.201 also demonstrated a capacity to noetically reacquire lost personal memories. Despite his inability to episodically recollect any personal experiences, he gradually relearned specific temporal and spatial details of his life (and also relearned information about celebrities). However, he experienced this content as facts (which they were) rather than as recollections. Patient M.L.202 shows a similar pattern of lost and relearned personal knowledge. M.L. suffered a brain trauma that left him densely amnesic for episodic memories pre-dating his injury. Despite the severity of his impairment, M.L. was able to 'relearn significant facts from his own past' (Ref 202, p. 1956), although this knowledge lacked any feeling of reacquaintance with the experiences his relearning was crafted to recapture. Interestingly, M.L. was also able to retrieve a few pre-morbid personal experiences. However, this spared knowledge was delivered to awareness without any feeling of reliving the circumstances in which it was acquired. Additional testing revealed that M.L.'s autonoetic awareness was seriously compromised, thus explaining the disconnection between the content in awareness and the lack of experienced referral to its point of origin. Demonstrations between an intact ability to (re)-acquire personal (and nonpersonal) knowledge in conjunction with impairments to autonoetic ability and pre-morbidly acquired personal content are seen throughout the literature.203–208 The takeaway message is that retrieval of content acquired in one's past is not sufficient to make that content an experience of memory. To so qualify, the retrieved content must be connected to a pre-reflective mode of awareness- autonoesis–in which the occurrent experience evokes a feeling of reliving one's past. Otherwise, the experience is one of knowing, believing, imagining, and so forth, but not one of remembering. Developmental disorders of episodic memory can show similar patterns of preserved (or relearned- depending on the age of onset) content in the absence of autonoetic reliving.209–215 Despite suffering severe (sometimes complete) episodic impairment, most of these children are able to rely on intact non-memorial systems to store and access learned content (rules, language, facts, and so forth). In many cases, they can be taught to read, write, and carry out everyday activities at a level sufficient to permit attendance in a mainstream school. Yet, the experience of this learned content and action lacks any feeling of the original experience of acquisition-i.e., it shows all the hallmarks of autonoetic impairment. For example, as a result of neurological insult suffered during childhood, patient M.S. was unable to episodically retrieve events in his life.213 Nonetheless, M.S. was able to learn and report some facts about his life experienced post-morbidly. For example, he knew that he had spent a recent winter away from home. Although his account was less detailed than might be expected of a person of his age, he could, for example, describe his parents' condominium and other specifics, suggesting that the acquired content, though not as detailed as recollection-based reports, nonetheless contained significant temporal and spatial information. Along similar lines, patient V.J.,211 who suffered dramatic episodic impairment (both retrograde and anterograde) at an early age, could, if cued, give an account of recently experienced events, although his reports did not match the level of specificity one would expect of children of his age. Importantly, the retrieved content lacked any sense of personal reliving. To summarize, it is reasonable to conclude that in some (though not all) cases of amnesia-both acquired and congenital-patients are able to acquire and access spatial, temporal, and self-referential information. However, this content is experienced as © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci lacking a sense of reacquaintance with the conditions of its acquisition. This suggests that such persons can retrieve, but not recollect content in varying degrees of detail. This, in turn, suggests that what has been compromised in these cases is not the content presented to awareness (though degradation in detail is often presentn); rather, it is the manner in which that content is presented to awareness: While content satisfying all the characteristics traditionally assumed to accompany an act of recollection (i.e., temporal, spatial, and self-referential) are available to awareness, those content no longer are experienced as acts of recollection.o Is Autonoetic Awareness Intrinsic to Memory? Memory's connection to the past is not one of logical inference. Rather, it consists in the feeling that the content in awareness stands in a direct, nonconceptual temporal relation to past experience.61,64,69,75,110,125,128,144,172 This form of attachment to the past (which James called 'warmth and intimacy' and Russell labeled 'feelings of pastness') is part of the subjective quality of recollection, and is made possible by the connection between retrieved content and autonoetic awareness.110,125,144,180 So, in what does the relation between autonoetic awareness and memory content consist? One possibility is that autonoetic awareness is intrinsic to certain content made available to consciousness. On this view, memory is the outcome of retrieving autonoetically endowed content. In contrast, a relational interpretation suggests that the connection between autonoesis and content is a matter of contingency (i.e., circumstance), not (bio)logical necessity. On this view, while autonoetic awareness and content normally are conjoined in the act of memory, they are not inseparable. The available evidence, though not plentiful, appears to favor the relational view-i.e., what makes an experience a memory experience is not the nature of the content presented to awareness, but the manner in which awareness becomes associated with that content during the act of retrieval. For example, Piolino et al.192 adopted Tulving's110 remember/know task (e.g., for review see Ref 182) to examine the relation between retrieved content and autonoetic experience in patients suffering episodic memory impairment. They found that, compared to non-demented controls, patients with Alzheimer's or Frontotemporal Dementia reported significantly fewer 'remember' responses (presumably indicative of autonoetic awareness) to describe their experience of retrieval. Based on these findings, the authors concluded that these two forms of dementia entail impairments to autonoetic awareness rather than the content in awareness. While suggestive, these results do not permit strong inferences concerning the relation between content and awareness. It might be that patients' overreliance of 'know' responses (i.e., noetic awareness) reflects the selective degradation (and thus unavailability for retrieval) of temporally propertied content in storage (i.e., the intrinsic view). By contrast, the bias toward 'know' responses could reflect impairment in patients' ability to conjoin autonoetic awareness with a-temporal content during retrieval (i.e., the relational view). In what follows, I present evidence that offers clearer support for the relational model. In a series of papers,42,125,172 my colleagues and I have presented the case of R.B., a 43-year-old male with an engineering degree from MIT. Following an automotive accident, R.B. exhibited a very unusual, but not unique,42,217,218 (for review see Ref 42) memory problem. He was capable of describing events from his life with the rich contextual detail traditionally associated with episodic recollection. However, he did not experience this content as an act of recollection. Rather, it was experienced as known from a third person perspective-i.e., it lacked the warmth, intimacy, and feeling of reliving associated with autonoetic experience. In short, his impairment selectively targeted autonoesis while leaving stored content unscathed (this is in contrast to most cases of episodic impairment-such as those reported in Section Is Autonoetic Awareness Intrinsic to Memory?- where the dysfunction can include degradation or loss of stored content as well as compromised autonoetic ability). For example, in response to a request to remember a specific time involving experiences as a student at MIT, R.B. replied: 'When I remember the scene with my friends, studying, I remember myself walking into the room ... and...other things I did and felt...But it feels like something I didn't experience... (something I) was told about by someone else. It's all quite puzzling.' He continued: 'I can see the scene in my head... I'm studying with friends in the lounge in the residence hall. But it doesn't feel like its mine... that I own it. It's like imagining the experience, but it was described by someone else.' Asked to report memories of his childhood, R.B. responded: 'I....(am) remembering scenes, not facts... I am recalling scenes... that is... I can clearly recall a scene of me © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cognitive Science What memory is at the beach in New London with my family as a child. But the feeling is that the scene is not my memory... as if I was looking at a photo of someone else's vacation.' (He then describes the scene in rich contextual detail) The retrieval of recent events shows a similar dissociation between content and feeling of reliving: 'I remember eating pizza in at XXX in Isla Vista about a month before (his head injury), but the memory belongs to someone else. But knowing I like pizza in the present... now... is owned by me...when I recall memories from my past I intellectually know they are about me. It just does not feel like it...when I remember scenes from before the injury they do not feel as if they happened to me-though intellectually I know they did.' R.B.'s reports (which are treated more fully in Ref 172) show all the hallmarks of episodic recollection, save for one thing-the notable absence of a feeling of autonoetic awareness. They contain detailed temporal, spatial, and self-referential elements that correctly track (accuracy was obtained via third party reports) the manner in which the original learning transpired. What they lack is the feeling that the content in awareness is a memory of what took place, as well as a nonanalytic confidence that it did take place (i.e., R.B.'s confidence that the content in awareness accurately tracked his life experiences was based exclusively on conceptual analysis). In short, R.B. did not feel as though the content he experienced were personal recollections. Rather, he experienced them as things he believed he should know but most likely were facts related to him by someone else (R.B. reports that he relied on inferential processes to decide whether the content in awareness could be something he personally experienced). It is important to note that R.B. gradually recovered his autonoetic abilities, at which time the 'same' content now was presented to awareness as personal recollections: 'What happened over the coming months...was interesting. Every once in a while, I would suddenly think about something in my past and I would 'own' it. That was indeed something 'I' had done and experienced. Over time, one by one, I would come to 'own' different memories. Eventually, after perhaps eight months or so, it seemed as if it was all owned... as if once enough individual memories were owned, it was all owned. For example, the MIT memory, the one in the lounge... I now own it. It's clearly part of my life, my past'. While this case stimulates a host of questions about both self and memory (many of these are addressed in42,172), for present purposes, the important points are (1) autonoetic awareness is not an intrinsic property of recollected content (see also Ref 128); content that contains all (or many) of the criterial features and richness of detail associated with recollection can be present in awareness, yet not be directly experienced as reliving one's past, and (2) the same (or essentially indistinguishable) content presented to awareness can be taken as 'not my past' or 'my past' depending on the functional integrity of the mechanisms, which enable autonoetic awareness. Summing Up As the evidence presented in Sections Memory is the Manner in Which Content is Given to Awareness, Not the Content Per Se and Is Autonoetic Awareness Intrinsic to Memory? make clear, there is no logical argument or empirical support for the idea that only episodic memory makes reference to the 'who, where and when' of past experience. While the fact that the two systems (episodic and semantic) share features is not a 'death sentence' for their partitioning into distinct categories, it highlights the difficulties faced by investigators who rely on 'time, place, and self' as the basis for classification (and, as we will see in Section Implications: Analysis of Content in Awareness is not Informative about the Mental Act in which it Occurs, this three-part classificatory scheme remains a preferred diagnostic tool for distinguishing episodic from semantic experience). Accordingly, the criterion of 'time, space and self' is insufficient for the task for which it was designed. By contrast, the autonoetic/noetic criterion (and its assessment by 'remember/know' tasks) captures a fundamental feature of memory phenomenology, providing a rationally warranted and empirically sound means for distinguishing memorial from non-memorial experience. A strong implication of the relational view is that stored content (often subject to considerable modification) is neither episodic nor semantic (see Sections Implications: The Neural Correlates of Memory and Implications: Dedicated Systems of Memory). It is subjectively a-temporal information (though its content may reference temporal information). It acquires subjective temporality in virtue of a concurrent act of awareness. Seen in this light, there are, strictly speaking, no systems of memory (see Section Implications: Dedicated Systems of Memory). Rather, there is content acquired in one's past that can be acted on by processes occurring at retrieval to confer temporal subjectivity. Memory, in short, is the manner in which mental content is experienced, not the preconditions (encoding, storage, and retrieval) that play a role © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. CrossWires wires.wiley.com/cogsci in enabling that experience.p As we saw in Section Memory Is the Manner in which Content Is Given to Awareness, Not the Content Per Se, those same preconditions, without autonoetic accompaniment, result in non-memorial experience. Episodic recollection thus occupies a unique position among the systems that have been grouped under the heading 'memory'. It, and it alone, enables an individual to transcend the present, endowing the act of retrieval with a direct, nonanalytic feeling that she/he is reliving a past experienc